Aman Hotep thei dies. Amen Hotep I 4th
becomes king. And he says, "I'm not
worshiping Amen anymore. I'm only going
to acknowledge the one true sun god, the
Aten, and I'm going to make my name
Akenatan." And so he changes it. And
then they start depicting themselves
with the elongated skulls. And where
does the skull elongation come from?
We don't really know. And many of the
historical kings themselves were merged
with divinity, the sun god, even up to
Louis the 14th, who was the sun god in
the French context.
And I've heard [music] a Greek college
professor say, I don't mean this in any
symbolic or spiritual sense.
I'm telling you that this literally
happened. Was this whole temple built
for Aman Hotep to enter it and not come
face to face with Aman Ra? It wasn't
actually happening. This is all made up.
This whole temple is here for nothing.
So you have a 500year period where we
can see a progression of architecture
getting bigger and bigger and bigger and
more monumental. [music]
All these ancient temples and sites that
were erected on behalf of these god
beings. It's every ancient culture
[music] recognizes these gods that exist
on our planet.
What is going on underneath the
pyramids? First, let me give you a
little bit of context. In 2024, a
collaborative effort between Egyptian
and Japanese researchers using ground
penetrating radar and electrical
resistivity tomography mapped the
western cemetery adjacent to the Great
Pyramid. Their non-invasive methods
revealed a shallow L-shaped structure
approximately 10 m long. We still don't
know the function of this structure, but
we do know that this underground
probably man-made artifice is verified
and real. Also verified and real, former
minister of antiquities, Dr. Zahi Hawas,
known for being a professional Debbie
Downer and skeptic, himself has
acknowledged the existence of three
independent tunnels associated with the
Sphinx. So that is the context in which
an absolute bomb was dropped on the
internet in 2025. Just recently, a team
of researchers led by Filippo Beyond
used a technique called synthetic
aperture radar Doppler tomography and
artificial intelligence to measure and
reconstruct what looks like a small city
or energy grid underneath the Giza
plateau. Technically, this modality SAR
Doppler tomography can map subsurface
territory. In fact, this technique is
sometimes used to map magma chambers
inside of volcanoes. But the image
circulating the internet involves a
level of granularity and detail and in
my opinion takes a lot of liberties. It
also involves handwavy claims about
perfectly accurate artificial
intelligence. You see, the actual
tomography images don't match what's
being circulated online. I think there's
a good chance there is something crazy
underneath the Giza Plateau, and I think
it might go very deep. But this new
discovery is very hard to assess. Are we
being conditioned to accept a truth that
the Egyptian Ministry of Culture is
already aware of? Is this sort of a roar
shock test? Is this purely fake news or
just some researchers grasping at
straws? to find out. Today I'm
interviewing an amazing guest, a
vigilante archaeologist in his 20s,
carrying the torch of Robert Shock,
Graham Hancock, and his mentor Ed
Barnhart. Without further ado, please
welcome this week's American Alchemist,
Luke Caverns.
All right, I'm here with Luke Caverns. I
couldn't be more excited to have you. Uh
we talked about this uh earlier. I'll
present you as a vigilante
archaeologist. I think you've you've
gone a really cool route where you know
archaeology in some respects I think is
can be myopic at times in its kind of
pure academic form and uh you are of the
lineage of uh Ed Barnhard who is your
mentor um but you you've told me you you
uh are inspired by Graham Hancock Randle
Carlson people like that um and I want
to get into a broader philosophical
discussion about kind of hardcore you
know uh academic archaeology versus you
know some of what they do But um I'm
just couldn't be more excited to have
you, man. Thank you for coming.
Well, thank you so much for for uh
inviting me. Yeah, I I um what you said
about the uh getting into like the
philosophical argument of of kind of
like mainstream archaeology versus
vigilante archaeology, that's a
fascinating uh topic. I can't wait to
get into it as well as everything else
that's going on.
Do you think your name Luke Caverns, you
know, there's a concept called nominal
determinism, which is if your name is
Larry, you're more likely to become a
lawyer. And so I think about your name,
Luke Caverns. Do you think your name at
all subliminally inspired you to pursue
uh archaeological quests?
You know what's funny? I don't think
I've I've blatantly said this. Uh
Caverns is just a second middle name. Uh
my last name is actually Reagan. And uh
and so the reason I did not go with my
last name when I was, you know, creating
a public persona or presenting myself in
public was one just for privacy
originally. Um not that I I guess I
don't care about that too much now. Um
but uh and also when people would search
up Luke Reagan, all you would ever find
was was Ronald Reagan. And um and so
it's the same family. He's like a
distant distant cousin of mine.
Really?
Yeah. But the uh but the determinism
actually comes from uh my my dad's side
of the family back in the 1890s. There
were you people can look it up. Um if
you pick up any book, if you go to like
to Halfpric Books down this road and
you're able to find a book about uh the
American West, like the Wild West,
people searching for lost Spanish gold
in the United States. This is a big
thing. The Spanish were here in the mid
to late 1500s searching for, you know,
ancient Native American treasure as well
as gold mines to send back to Spain.
Um, there's all these great stories
about them and if you find these books
about it, you'll find my family uh in
those books. And that's kind of where my
family name begins is searching for lost
Spanish gold mine and uh treasure in the
American Southwest. So, in Big Bend,
there's, you can look it up. There's a
place called Reagan Canyon, and there's
uh this huge epic tale of like lost gold
and mystery and mysterious deaths of
people from West Texas all the way out
to San Antonio, Texas. And it's my
family like battling all these people
for this lost Spanish gold. It's it's
fascinating story. Um, one of those
brothers makes it out, gets involved in
the in the oil field, um, and in gold
mining. Then his son picks it up after
him and goes looking in New Mexico for
the uh the seven lost Spanish gold mines
of of southern New Mexico and within a
year he discovered them and he opened up
these 450 year old gold mines and had
this company going for about 8 years and
eventually [clears throat] there was a
tragedy that befell the company and and
the whole company fell apart and they
fell into poverty and my dad was
accidentally born during that time and
uh so my dad didn't experience any of
that. Didn't really inherent in inherit
that adventurous spirit and somehow I
did like somehow it it carried over to
me and um yeah I just so I just kind of
come from this lineage of people who
have been interested in the ancient
world and and while he was a gold miner
and an explorer he was also what we call
today an antiquarian. So it's a guy
Antiquarians were usually like guys who
were pretty wealthy that had the money
to be able to carry out pretty
unorganized archaeological exped
expeditions and um
or excavations and he would just collect
the artifacts and so you know they're
sitting in boxes today and and we still
have them. Um so yeah that would be the
the the determinism.
That's fascinating. It's almost like you
have some unfinished business on behalf
of your family that you are now
pursuing. And uh we were talking about
this earlier on the phone, but it's like
I think a lot of people in the kind of
academic world of archaeology need to
fully separate out, you know, their
pursuits with anything autobiographical.
So they can't say that they're, you
know, inspired by anything seemingly
irrational or seemingly like, you know,
some hermetic lineage or, you know,
whatever. It has to be like I am
engaging in perfect deductive and
inductive logic, you know, and I'm just
just, you know, figuring it out. And um
that's so not how humans in general
interact with any subject matter. And so
uh
you know, we were talking about uh
Hinrich von Schlimman, the guy who found
Troy in the 1870s, this German
businessman who was like he was really
interested in like you know um Homer and
Thusidities. And so he was like, you
know, I think the pelpeneisian war
happened. And then that like, you know,
led him to or Sir James Bruce who uh,
you know, we have the book of Enoch
because he discovered it and he was like
a a Scottish, you know, Freemason
and he went looking for the ark of the
covenant and he came back with the book
of Enoch. So you have all these like fas
are, you know, maybe part and parcel of
that of that sort of, you know, lineage,
which is awesome. Yeah, I think I still
I hold on to that that romance of the
ancient world um that inspired so many
of the great stories that we still talk
about today that really inspired the
only stories that are worth talking
about, right? Um you know, people don't
talk about centuries later the highly
logistical and ultra sterilized, you
know, deductions of such and such such
and such. it's always some kind of human
passion that lives on, you know. Um, and
I totally agree with you and and it's
that
it's sort of that that ancestral calling
drive to dive into the ancient world and
and uh I don't know like explore really
distant places. Um yeah, I I still feel
the romance of the ancient world when
there's such a drive to sterilize
everything. You know, I think that that
is the problem with
modern mainstream archaeology is that it
is so sterilized and so against anything
being
and of course they would never admit
this and I don't know if it if passion
is the right word but but they don't
like romance. I I was having a
conversation about this thing
specifically uh with an archaeologist or
maybe he's like a geoarchchaeologist and
I was talking to him. He was he was
accusing me of being somebody who's
wanting to to sell the mystery, which
that's a big thing that goes on as
people sell the mystery. And they kind
of just they kind of inflate things
where there's not really a mystery and
they turn it into something. And there's
a lot of mystery out there. But I think
if I'm selling anything, I'm just trying
to convince people or reignite in people
the romance and the wonder of the
ancient world and like the magic that
that has that that that carries with it.
It's like an escape from our modern day.
And uh of course that wasn't good
either. There's no human nature is not
allowed to prevail anymore or or to to
shine. It's everything has to be so
sterilized and so un just thoroughly
uninteresting and then they wonder why
they're losing you know the popular
audience and why they've never been able
to connect with them. I also think it's
bad thinking like if thinking is you
have to engage in some sort of sorting
mechanism of like truth and not truth.
Uh they're actually subject to dogma
when it comes to like a good example is
like the Bible
taking that entirely throwing it out as
not historical because it's religious
and we live in this kind of age of
materialist reductionism all uh you know
Richard Dawkins or whatever. So like
nothing in the Bible could be true when
like yeah some of this stuff seems to
defy our kind of modern physics but
there are plenty of things we have
actually like a lot of you know
historical evidence for and you've
spoken about this or you you have any
good examples of things in the Bible
that [laughter] let's be real if you're
into fasting sauna sessions or you just
think clearly when you're dialed in
physically hydration isn't optional I
learned this the hard way I'd be mid-in
sharp one minute and then suddenly foggy
and low energy the next. It wasn't
burnout and it wasn't just in my head.
It was electrolytes. That's why I
started using one of my favorite new
products, Element. It's a zero sugar
electrolyte drink mix formulated with a
dose of sodium, potassium, and magnesium
that actually makes a difference. No
artificial stuff, no weird additives,
just what your body needs to stay sharp,
especially if you're on a low carb diet,
intermittent fasting, or working out
intensely. Seriously, if you have an
active lifestyle, Element is a gamecher.
Element was co-founded by a super
interesting guy. His name is Rob Wolf, a
former research biochemist and
best-selling author who now works with
the Navy Seal resiliency team. Since I
started using Element, my focus is more
locked in. I recover faster and have
stopped dealing with the late day energy
crash. Here's the best part. You can try
it totally risk-free. If you don't like
it, they'll give you a full refund, no
questions asked. Honestly, their
customer service is some of the best
I've ever seen, and the formula is clean
and healthy. Get your free element
sample pack with any purchase at
drinklmnt.com/alchemy.
Again, that's drinklmnt.com/alchemy.
Also, try the new element sparkling, a
bold 16oz can of sparkling electrolyte
water. That's drinklmnt.com/alchemy
to grab your free sample pack with any
purchase. hydrate like it matters
because it does.
Oh, well, I mean, there's so much I
think, yeah, I mean, if we're in the
conversation of looking for historical
evidence of the Bible, you would need to
go back to um, you know, the Old
Testament. Um, cuz there aren't really
any historians that debate whether or
not Jesus Christ was a real person. Um,
but as far as something that I that I
have been interested that I've spoken
about before is the uh the
archaeological evidence of the Exodus.
And um I don't know I mean this is such
a nuanced topic. Uh, I don't know how
deeply we could go into this, but um,
you know, you you read you read the
Exodus and it's it's fascinating as to
um, it's fascinating like the specific
details that they get into. Uh, you
know, common common phrases that were
said during that time. uh the the
details that are in the Exodus story
when you're looking back could have only
been written by somebody who was alive
in Egypt during the time of the Exodus,
which would be sometime during like the
mid New Kingdom period. So let's let's
call it very roughly somewhere between
uh 1500 and 1,000 BC. And so some of the
details in there as to like how the
women squat on these blocks and give and
and give birth to children was something
that you would have only known if you
were living there and not living in
Israel a thousand years later, right? Um
and so it's it's just fascinating like
getting to your point, it's just
fascinating. Um,
yeah, that that uh and I have I have
some problems with this too as to how we
we take a religious text like that and
we just completely cast it to the side.
They do the same thing. Um,
they do the same thing with the Iliad
and the Odyssey, you know, they do the
same thing with Homer's works. Like
completely cast that out. Um,
and I Yeah, I think it just kind of uh
I don't know. You're throwing the baby
out with the bath water.
Yeah. Well, you It's like Yeah. A good
example is the Hri von Slimman, you
know, Pelpeneisian world. Well, that
Troy was never real. Well, actually, he
found Troy. Another good example is the
myth of Atlantis where you have, you
know, Plato and uh Solon, you know,
saying that, you know, there was there
was a great flood here 9,000 years ago.
So he's saying this in 600 BC that dates
back to 9, you know, 9,600 BC, which is,
you know, the year that uh, you know,
according to people like Graham Hancock
and and Randall Carlson, uh, there's all
this archaeological interesting evidence
that that, you know, the younger dry uh,
uh, uh, period ended
and so and it was, you know, this this
this great flood, this meltwater pulse
1B.
Um, and so that that pattern matches,
you know, as well. Uh so I think it's
really easy to relegate things as you
know religion uh or myth uh when in fact
you know like the the flood myths there
are over there are hundreds and hundreds
of these flood myths and they're across
uh completely uncorrelated desperate
civilizations that you know didn't
really have a ton of contact with each
other and so you know one would I think
be wise to take that seriously if you're
like a modern archaeologist not just
throw that out.
Yeah. Yeah. I think the there's a
there's like a conservative argument
there that you know the reason we have
so many flood myths from around the
world is because well you know people
live next to large bodies of water and
large bodies of water are bound to have
some kind of horrific flooding someday
that people will just continue to tell.
Uh but I've talked to Dr. Barnhart about
this and even Dr. Barnhart uh said this
on a podcast that he and I were on
together was that even he feels that to
some degree this really might be some
kind of leftover ancestral memory that
is passed down of this you know horrific
event that just eviscerated so much of
humanity and people have have held on to
that. But at a certain point I had the
realization
that you know this modern fascination
that you know millions of people are
wrapped up in this this search for a you
know a lost civilization this Atlantean
civilization and that kind of that can
kind of get muddy because
the term Atlantis has now kind of become
an umbrella term just for this concept
of a lost civilization or lost
civilizations that could have existed
long before
you know it's this whole alternate space
has become this huge range of beliefs.
Yeah, it's frustrating. You see,
everybody's super You watch Gaia and
they're like the Atlanteanss could
teleport blah blah blah. And then like
even to be honest, when I look at Graham
Hancock, the super rigorous part of his
work is around the younger desty. I
think he's correct on that. I think
he'll be vindicated by history. And then
when he gets into the, you know, proto
civilization crossing, you know, the
Atlantic, you know, where it's like you
have this architecture in the Americas
that lines up with this architecture in,
you know, Asia or Europe or whatever. I
think it gets extremely speculative and
I think he would even admit that if you
kind of, you know, push him on it.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, and you know, there's
that quote that's that's gone crazy
viral on his uh in his debate against
Flint where uh I think Joe asks him, he
said he says, "So, would you say in in
what has been studied, there's no
evidence for a lost civilization?" He's
like, "Well, yes, in what has been
studied, there's no evidence for it."
I get what he's saying,
but it but I mean, that's a that's a
serious point is is that is that we
don't I I try to tell people this is is
that I'm very open-minded to everything.
very open-minded to the extremely
open-minded to the fact that ancient
people are achieving a lot of things
that we can't really explain by
conventional means. They're incredibly
intelligent, far more intelligent than I
think that they've been given credit
for. Um, but I mean, we still don't have
like hard evidence of the fact that this
civilization existed or that there were
any of them. But you can see these holes
in the historical timeline that need an
answer. It needs to be filled. I don't
know what the answer is. Um, and so
that's that's the approach that that
I've always that I've always taken. And
um and the more I've learned, the more
I've realized that
yes, Plato is using Atlantis as a tool
in his in his works to essentially, you
know, he he builds up the story that
Athens was, you know, 9,000 years ago
was at war or he's he's either building
up the story or he's recounting the
story, but he's saying that Athens was
once at war with this longlost city
named Atlantis.
Atlantis was overly arrogant and you
know uh and disrespected the gods and
they were impious and and so they fell.
Well, he's obviously telling a story
there because Athens did not exist 9,000
years before that, right?
Um it just it I mean as far as we have
evidence for they did not and Athens has
been thoroughly excavated.
Yeah.
Um but that part could just be an
allegory. Sure. Athens did not exist
9,000 years ago. But maybe he's
recalling on some kind of mythical city
that people back then knew about or had
heard about or that you hear in a
children's story or or maybe Solon
really did hear about a lost city while
he was in while he was in Egypt. But the
reality there is that we just don't
really know exactly what the reality is
there. And there's, you know, I guess
mainstream archaeologists are very quick
to say that they know exactly
what Plato's intentions were and that
the fact that he just pulls it out of
thin air and made it up. I don't think
that that can be I don't think that that
can concretely be said. Um, but there's
no doubt that he's using it as an
allegory in his story because he's
making Atlantis as a mirror for Athens.
He's warning people that Athens is
falling, you know.
So, there's there's some nuance there.
And you know, the more I the more I have
studied the ancient world, the more I've
realized just how unsure we are about
the ancient world.
Absolutely. Well, Plato's extremely hard
to decipher because he and Socrates had
a bias against writing. And so it's all
through this sort of parapotetic
dialogue or whatever is how you have to
interpret everything. And Tomus and
Creteus, the discussion of Atlantis, the
whole thing is occurring at a mythos
festival. And so it's like and then even
in if you read Plato's Republic, he says
at the very beginning like a lot of what
I'm about to say is a lie. But then he
goes on to describe things that I think
probably speak closer to like true
onlogical truth.
Again, this is not something anybody can
lay claim on. I think in our earthly
world or whatever, but in my assessment
closer to ontological truth than like
anybody, but he says that up top and a
lot of this was due to the persecution
of his mentor Socrates who, you know,
the state ended up killing and so
you never know with him. It's always
I love how much you know about this.
[laughter]
I don't know, man. I'm very passionate
about it.
Um, but you know, it's it's it's always
hard to it's always hard to say. Um,
okay, this is a perfect segue. uh very
hot in the news right now and it goes
along handinhand with what you're
talking about which is um basically uh
uh that maybe some of these
civilizations could have been more
advanced but there is this whole
grifting you know uh uh playing up the
mystery you know uh uh industry around
us that we have to be honest about uh
there are these researchers this Italian
guy uh Filippo Byondi and in 2022 I
guess you have this this peer-reviewed
paper and It's just coming out now. Um
that through these synthetic aperture uh
radar imagery, we have found these vast
structures below the pyramids. Uh the
verdict seems like it's still out. I
texted Graham Hancock about it. He said,
"I have no reason to um believe that the
source here is being honest." So
[laughter]
yeah, I don't know. Um what do you
think?
Uh I'm gonna have to agree with Graham.
[laughter] Um, and and I'll say this,
uh, for everybody watching because I
know that, you know, there's people in
the audience who they hear about this
and they're fascinated by it and they're
like, "Whoa, okay, finally what we have
been searching for, something more is
being vindicated." Um, and just putting
this out there, there are people out
there that know that you feel that way
and they know that that's an easy way to
inspire hope in people and make an
incredible amount of money through
funding at the same time. And uh and so
just putting it out there, every
respected person um in the alternate
space is highly highly highly skeptical.
I know this cuz we're all in a group
chat with each other. Um and uh that's
just that's just the truth. Well, there
also, you know, I invest a little bit in
aerospace in my sort of investing day
job and um a friend of mine, he's really
deep on like synthetic aperture radar
and other kind of sensing modalities is
like
he's like, "Look, I have to do the exact
math, but I doubt that synthetic
aperture radar could ever penetrate that
deeply underground." And I even actually
the companies that it came out of,
Capella Space and Umbra, I looked at I
diligenced them and with my venture
capital hat on and that was not my
impression either. It wasn't it wasn't
about penetrating deep below the the
ground and then you look at the
granularity with which they're drawing
these things and they say that their AI
is infallible or whatever that
that's crazy right that's crazy yeah
because anybody who you know I work with
AI every day like you just uh you know
trying to get easy answers about
something with history you know I've got
chat GBT or Grock or whatever on the
side and I can ask it quick questions
but I can't ask it a detailed question a
AI is not as sophisticated as human
beings by a long shot. And so for
someone to say their AI is infallible is
insane to me.
I agree. It is insane. And it's also
just think about the way AI works,
right? It's like pattern matching based
on other things. So it's like when you
get an answer around chat GPT, it's just
like the their best averaging and and
you know to their assessment like the
highest quality stuff that they're
sifting through online. But it's it's
it's just token prediction. It's just
pattern matching on steroids and it's
gotten very good. Yeah.
So it's like touring passible pattern
matching or whatever.
If you think about the pattern matching
necessary to craft together an energy
generator machine underground that is n
of one. That's not like you don't have
like a large sample size to like do
pattern matching on that. So like yeah
it's just literally impossible given the
way we know AI works. And the other
thing is is you know before they are
even going deep underground they're
scanning into the pyramid and supposedly
you know that they um they they create
this this 3D model I'm sure that you've
seen where they took a they took a
visual 3D model of the king's chamber
and the relieving chambers and they they
um they duplicated it five times inside
the coffer pyramid and they said this is
what they're detecting.
There's no serious team that would do
that. You would not take a 3D model of a
chamber inside a different pyramid and
then superimpose it on top of this
pyramid you're scanning and say this is
what like that that's crazy that you
wouldn't do that. It just
that's a unique structure to the great
pyramid and it it's very unserious to do
that right. Um, now on top of that, even
with that 3D model that they that they
created, they did not include and in
their scans, you cannot see represented
the chambers that we know are inside
Coffer's Pyramid. The one that the ones
that you can pay the ticket at the Giza
Plateau and walk into today. Those
chambers aren't aren't included. As well
as there are these two cavities. One's
at 69 ft below the surface and the other
one's like 112 ft below the surface. and
they're big cavities that are bigger
than the, you know, burial chamber
inside Coffer's pyramid. Um, those
aren't represented in the scans either.
You have, so you have nothing of what we
know is there. The way that we know that
those are there, I think we talked about
this on the phone, is uh Luis Alvarez,
the the scientist that worked on the
Manhattan project. He takes a team there
in the 60s and they do a scan in the
Coffer pyramid. And I think that they
just they're standing inside the burial
chamber and they're scanning up towards
the you know towards the point of the
pyramid and they they checked and tested
the equipment and they were able to
detect all four sides or all four
corners as well as the sides and and the
uh the pinnacle of the pyramid. So they
knew that their scans were that that
these muon scans were accurate. And in
everything that they scanned, they
didn't see any more chambers above uh
above the chamber that they were
standing in. And then in the 70s,
another team from Stanford came in and
did another scan and they confirmed
this. They had the same results scanning
up, but they also scanned the shallow uh
bedrock around and that's where they
found these two cavities in the ground
below the coffer pyramid. So, and also
we know that these are accurate because
they confirmed it and tested everything.
Well, this new coffer scan hasn't it's
not even tested. They just pointed it at
the pyramid and then you know now we
have this huge press release. over
something that wasn't tested, you know?
It's just crazy to me.
It's crazy. Well, it's funny. Like, I'm
very pro podcasting and indie journalism
and I, you know, I never thought the
pendulum would maybe swing this far
where it's like I look at the incentives
on Twitter and it's like some of the
tweets where I'll caveat them and I'll
say, "Look, I don't know if I believe
this. This is speculation or whatever.
Like, let's let's let's speculate and,
you know, see what's up." Those like do
really well, you know? And then the ones
where I'm like, you know, it's very, you
know, more nuanced or skeptical or
whatever, like that, you know, those
don't do well.
And um like I tweeted a thing. It was
like, you know, this little um picture
of like a UFO on Mars or whatever. I'm
like, you know, maybe this is a UFO. Do
we have any good debunks or whatever?
And uh you know, that went crazy. And
then I I came back and I was like, I've
come to the conclusion this is a rock
protrusion. It's not a UFO. And it just
didn't do as well. So the incentives
lead you towards sensationalism. Oh, and
that that's the thing, right, is um is
you can be so brainwashed is a hard term
to use, but people get so taken
advantage of. You know, there are so
many people that are in their 9 to5
going to work every day looking for
whether they realize it or not, like
you're just looking for more. Yeah. You
know, you're just looking for more in
your in your life, things that are
interesting. And we're so consistently
lied to in the media when it comes to
politics and when it comes to, you know,
uh, socioeconomics, world economics,
foreign affairs. We get lied to all the
time and have been for decades. Um, and
people don't trust anything anymore.
They don't.
And so, you know, that bleeds into every
facet of of reality. And then
it's very easy for someone
for like a third party sitting on the
outside to see this huge group of people
that are being taken advantage of by
their government by you know by the
media being lied to and these guys are
already the bad guys. So you can take
this other fascinating topic that is
ancient history and you just kind of
wrap a whole bow around that and man you
can you can make millions of views you
know by you know having these huge
conspiracy webss being made out of
things and if you're if you're
constantly speculative and never answer
any questions dude you just inspire so
much like uh wonder in people but a lot
of times it's based on just utter BS.
Totally. And I think the distinction you
have to make is are are you pedalling a
known lie? Cuz if you are, then you
should, you know, take yourself off air
and do some introspection, you know, and
and and figure your life out. If you're
not and you're explicitly saying, I
don't know, but we're like exploring
this together. This is not some official
expert view, but like this is possible,
that's fine. Yeah. you know, and I think
uh the breakdown of trust leads to uh
another criteria which is like do we
trust the person's thought process or
the person like you know they're they're
they're just being an honest actor.
Yeah.
Um where if they don't know about
something, you know, they'll they can
change their mind or or like say like
this is probabilistic thinking or
maintain some epistemic humility. So
yeah. Well, that's interesting on Luis
uh Walter Alvarez. So it sounds like we
already have deeper knowledge on pyramid
structures than what you know these guys
are even coming out with. Do we have ev
any evidence that there's anything
underground? Because you've talked about
this and um I think the the Ministry of
Culture, what's his name? Haz like Zw.
Yeah. Zia Waz. He's talked about you
know maybe structures under under you
know the Sphinx.
Yeah. Yeah.
So is there is there something there?
This show is sponsored by BetterHelp. If
you are going through something,
anything, I always think talking about
it helps. I've also always believed that
taking care of your mental well-being is
as essential as staying physically fit,
especially when life keeps you on the
go. For me, it's interviews, projects,
and travel. Sometimes you just need to
blow off some steam. I've seen firsthand
how a solid support system can transform
your dayto-day. Traditional therapy
costs anywhere from $100 to $250 per
session. It often takes a lot of time to
book the sessions. It's hard to know
who's a quality therapist. BetterHelp
makes weekly therapy perfectly
accessible with a flat weekly fee that
saves you a lot of time and money. You
get instantly matched up with an amazing
therapist and you can vet them based on
their track record. What I really
appreciate is how easy it is to connect
with one of BetterHelp's over 30,000
licensed therapists. No waiting rooms,
no rigid scheduling, just guidance and
support delivered online. Whether you're
tackling everyday stress, managing
anxiety, or simply looking to build
better coping skills, don't let these
things fester or build up. BetterHelp
provides a straightforward, affordable
way to get the care you deserve. Your
well-being is worth it. It's the most
important thing in your life, even more
important than aliens. So visit
betterhelp.com/alchemy
pod today to get 10% off your first
month. That's betterhp.com/alchemy
pod. A l c h e m y p o d. After you sign
up, they'll ask you where you heard
about them. Please support our show and
tell them we sent you. That would go a
long way.
Under the Sphinx specifically under the
Giza plateau or the pyramids. Okay, so
the [clears throat] Sphinx thing goes
back to Edgar Casey, and there's
probably a lot of people who know a lot
more about, you know, this guy.
Supposedly, he was a psychic and uh
another Atlantis guy.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so he
I I'm could be getting this wrong, but I
think he was on like a psychedelic trip
or something. and uh and he essentially,
you know, had some kind of vision that
there's this chamber beneath the Sphinx
that holds this hall of records, you
know, that that tells the story of
Atlantis. And so this has been a that's
the 1940s. So this has been around for
80 years or so. Um been been very
popular. And the drilling that they did
in the '9s to see if there was a to see
if there was a chamber there, that was
overseen by Zawas. And you can see in
the video when they drill, they drill
away from the Sphinx, you know, I I
don't know, just to to a semi-shallow
depth and they go, "Oh, there's nothing
there. We're not going to drill
anymore."
That's a little weird to me. Yeah.
Um, [clears throat]
but I I I would say, as I say with my
audience all the time, with these really
grand ideas that are out there, my def
my default position is always probably
not, but maybe. You know, that's just
like if we're being real with ourselves,
that's the that's the reality. Now, as
far as things under the Giza Plateau,
absolutely. The Giza Plateau is like a
honeycomb. It's it's as much empty space
under the ground as it is solid bedrock.
And um this comes from a whole host of
factors. So, on the northern cliff, um
on the northern cliff face to the west
of the Great Pyramid, uh there's this
tomb called the tombs of the birds. And
they call that they call it that because
uh in the 1940s when it was being
excavated um uh so so Egypt declared war
on Germany um I think in 45
and they were nervous
of the of uh being under attack of an
air raid and you know they thought that
the Luftwaffa was going to come in and
bomb the pyramids or something and but
there's still excavations going on you
know they never stopped excavations
during the war so they're trying to
identify like where can we go, you know,
to use as bomb shelters. So, they find
these tombs on the on the uh northern
cliff. And while they're in there
excavating it, they find this little
wooden bird. And so, it's been popularly
thought that uh or it's been speculated
that this could be evidence of
aerodynamics like thousands of years
before, you know, it was discovered. And
of course, Egyptologists quickly brush
it off, but I've always wondered if it's
been tested. And apparently, Mythbusters
uh did a little thing on it and could
determine that it actually could fly if
you added like one thing to it. Anyways,
interesting.
At the back of that tomb, there was
something that wasn't recorded by the
original uh explorers in that
the tomb builders as they're chipping
away everything. And it's amazing. Have
you ever been to Egypt?
Yep.
Okay. So, so you probably went to the
Valley of Kings.
I did.
And so, you think about how big of a
project that is when you go all the way
down to the back of those tombs.
It's insane.
Every square inch of that tomb is ciried
away and carried out. It's a big
project, you know, to do that.
And um so [clears throat] while they're
doing that, they hit a cavern and uh you
go through like one of these cracks in
the walls and there's these caves that
go under the Giza Plateau, the whole
plateau. And uh the further they go back
in these caves, the more little
artifacts and stuff that they find. And
as they um the more they've explored the
Giza Plateau, the more they have found
uh examples of these tombs going, you
know, these shaft tombs that they're
building going deep underground. and
then they hit a cave and so the
Egyptians obviously explore it. We don't
really know what the Egyptians thought
of these caves or or what they believed
uh by them that's like invisible in the
historical record. Um what else is under
the great pyramid is you probably know
is um you know the uh the Giza plateau
the limelight is taken is completely
taken up by the pyramids and and
rightfully so. But when you visit the
pyramids and you're trying not to
stumble over all the stones, you will
notice how many holes just descend down
in the ground into nowhere, right? And
5,000 years of sand has been blowing in
these things and it's never filled up,
you know, this these holes and shafts
and labyrinths underneath the plateau.
And um and truth be told, I mean, we
know that some of them were uh either
vertical shaft tombs or they're uh 45°
shaft tombs. And they'll go down into
this labyrinth where we'll find tombs
there. Um many of these are later
periods. So let's call it a,000 BC to
well into the Roman period, 300 AD, you
know, up until uh Constantine becomes
Christian and all the temples are closed
and everything. You know, you have
Roman, you have Romans who want to be
buried at the foot of the Great Pyramid.
So, they go in, they take out the old
Greek, Persian, Assyrian, Egyptian
bodies and replace them with themselves.
So, um you know, you have you just have
an incredible density under the Great
Pyramids. Further than that would be the
Osiris shaft, which I'm sure you've
heard of. Um, you know, as as as famous
as the Osiris shaft is, there's such
little amount of literature about it and
what exactly it was used for. It's uh if
you're walking on the causeway, so from
the middle pyramid, Coffer's pyramid,
that the thing that's the center point
of this whole SARS scan, you have that
causeway that goes down to the Sphinx.
You you may remember this just a big
stone road. Well, the Osiris shaft is
totally inconspicuous. You wouldn't even
know where it was if somebody didn't
show you. I was with Land of Kim and he
showed me if you're familiar with him.
And um so you go down in the Osiris
shaft and it drops down. You have this
initial chamber that's got seven uh
seven chamber extensions. What those
were used for, we don't really know um
exactly. We don't know. Uh then there's
another descending chamber that goes
down. You go down this huge ladder and
there's this room that's filled with
water. And they don't know to what
extent it was filled with water in
ancient times, but in the center there's
this elevated platform that has this
huge sarcophagus in it. And and what's
really interesting is that in the fifth
century, Heroditus is exploring in
Egypt. And he's told about this huge
shaft that goes underneath the Great
Pyramids. And he would and we don't
think that he actually went down there.
Maybe he didn't know where the entrance
was or maybe the entrance was lost or
maybe this was just even a legend in his
time. We don't really exactly know.
[gasps]
But he records that down in the Osiris
shaft there was the tomb of a great king
on an island surrounded by a lake of
water. And it's like what is that? You
know, like what on an island under the
Giza plateau surrounded by a lake of
water. Well, sure enough, they uh I
think it's in the the 80s or or the '9s
that this expedition is carried out. Of
course, all the credit is taken by
Zahiwas. Yeah. uh if you I I read his
paper recently um on I think it's called
Giza and the Osiris shaft and at the
very beginning he takes soul credit for
it. He's like he's like he's like this
is my single greatest discovery in you
know in my Egyptological career or
whatever.
But that's fascinating. There's like a
lake
in the where the tomb possibly was.
It's probably a little bit bigger than
the size of this. No, it's maybe like
two or three times the size of this room
and it was filled with water
and it's underground
and it's underground and this and
there's this huge sarcophagus that's
elevated sitting in the middle of it.
Today the water table is risen and it's
covered up the sarcophagus but in
ancient times they think that the water
was actually fascinating
and that there was a there was a a
sarcophagus raised up above the water.
So when you went down there it'd be a
sarcophagus surrounded by water. Do we
have any other historical writing about
that outside of Heroditus?
Not that I know of.
That is fascinating. That's so
interesting. Wow. Do you Yeah, go for
it.
Well, I was going to say the thing that
I that struck me as similar to that is
the Osirion. Have you heard of this
before?
No.
Okay. So, the Assyriion is probably one
of the most mysterious places in all of
Egypt.
It was constructed at a psycho in Abidos
which is um Abidos according to the
traditional Egyptological timeline
abidos is even older than Giza was
around long before the the pyramids. And
so the traditional Egypt's logical
explanation is that in the 19th dynasty
uh Si the first builds this temple um
and it's this oddly shaped L temple and
behind that he created and I should say
this temple is made out of like modestly
sized limestone blocks. So the blocks
are maybe this big um big but not
something that a few men couldn't carry
um and stack. And it's a beautifully
made
dynastic temple. Um, you know, just you
recognize it as that iconic Egyptian
style. But then behind it and lower into
the ground, maybe another 30 ft into the
ground before you get to the roof is
something called the Oyion. And it is
made out of
the biggest stones in all of Egypt or in
these temples. This is in southern
Egypt. And uh it's the biggest stones in
all of Egypt. And rather than how the
rest of the temple was made out of
modestly sized limestone blocks, this is
made out of gigantic
uh red azwan granite stones, only two of
those stones could fit in this room. Um
this huge square pillars, none of it has
hieroglyphics on it or anything like
that. Um just utterly completely
different construction style. So this is
a this is a really fascinating topic in
this space and people who are who are
interested in in ancient Egypt will know
exactly what I'm talking about. Um, I
don't believe that the Osirion was
created by STI. I think it's far older
than STI. When people [clears throat]
say that, they think it's 12,000 years
old. Um, it's more so just a popular
belief. It isn't actually based on, you
know, anything. Um, I think that whoever
built that also built the Sphinx temple.
You may remember this. It's that huge
red granite temple next to next to the
Sphinx. I'm sorry, the Valley Temple.
Um, gigantic stones. I mean, some of
them couldn't even fit in this room. Um,
those two architects must be the same.
And I think that they're much older than
the 19th dynasty,
more than 2,000 years old.
Well, in the Sphinx itself, Robert
Shock, John Anthony West talk about
limestone, water erosion, damage on the
nose or whatever. And so they they think
that indicates that the Sphinx existed
at a time where you didn't have this
arid kind of desert climate in in uh
Egypt. And so that would predate, you
know, obviously
even the old kingdom in in in Egypt. Do
you uh do you believe that the Sphinx
itself was also kind of far far older
than
I think that the Sphinx is probably the
strongest argument in all of Egypt of an
exceptionally old artifact or monument.
Um you know, even Graham Hancock has
come around. If you really study the py
the pyramids,
you get to a certain point where you
become locked in a certain time frame.
Uh and that time frame is the fourth
dynasty. Anybody who studies it
objectively will eventually come to
this.
What what dates are the fourth dynasty?
20 well so the fourth dynasty is um well
it's very rough but let's call it 2600
to like let's call it like 2650 to 2450.
200 year period BC.
Um, a [clears throat] lot of people
don't like that because you know this
idea of like the 12,000 Egypt being
12,000 years old is so popular. Um, but
unfortunately that actually isn't based
in anything. Um, the only evidence for
Egypt being considerably older is is the
Sphinx. And um,
well, it sounds like the Sphinx and the
the these granite structures. Well, I
think that I think that that is
contemporaneous with I think it's
contemporaneous with the Sphinx temple
when those two things were built. That
can be argued.
Okay.
Um
but both you would say are older than
you know Egypt itself as a civilization
or would you say
I think I think almost to me almost
certainly the Sphinx definitely is. I I
can say that I can say that with
the other two it's more speculative
more specul but clearly there's some
conflation going on between these
structures that we can't date that seem
presumably older and then these you know
traditional Egyp Egyptian structures. Is
that right?
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um just just uh
finishing up on the pyramids and then we
go to that. Um, you know, even Graham
Hancock, like when he was on, uh, when
it was just him on Rogan a couple years
ago, uh, they talked about it and he
said that he that he believes that the
vast majority of the Great Pyramid was
constructed during the reign of Kufu and
that he wonders if the subterranean
level and that that lower mound uh,
structure, the work that was done under
the pyramid, if that's not part of this,
you know, something that's inherited
from this even older civilization. And
even um are you familiar with Ben Van
Kirkwick X?
He's he does stuff with Randall Carlson.
Yeah. So he was on a podcast called Lost
Ancient Technology or something and they
were in front of the pyramids and and
they talk about how Graham has come
around to believing that the pyramids
are fourth dynasty. And I think that
that's where I think that's where the
evidence points. Um now talking about
the uh talking about the Sphinx uh that
erosion on the Sphinx is just
if the Sphinx was really constructed
under the reign of Kafra cuz what they
what they say that they think happened
is that you had this huge limestone
outcropping um in the in a a uh a canal
from from the uh from the Nile River
used to come right out to the base of
the pyramids. You know, when you're out
the Sphinx was, if you're standing at
the base of the Sphinx, without any
effort, you could throw a stone into the
Nile River without any effort at all.
Um, that's how close the Nile was coming
up to the Giza Plateau. And so, as
people are sailing by,
uh, they almost certainly would have
noticed this huge limestone outcropping.
The top of the Sphinx head, think about
if that's how how high up that limestone
used to go, it was no surprise that it
was there. um which contradicts what
they what they what the traditional idea
is about the construction of Koffra's uh
pyramid complex in that they
accidentally hit this huge limestone
outcropping and then decided to to turn
it into a sphinx or something like that.
There's a big hole there. There's
something there that doesn't quite make
sense. It's not like they accidentally
ran into this. Uh if anybody here, you
could go on Google Earth and do this.
It's much more obvious when you're there
in person. If you look at the height of
the Sphinx's head and you look around
you, you're like,
there's no way they accidentally hit
this thing. This is a huge limestone
outcropping that they always had to have
known was there. Especially if you're
sailing by, you would see that limestone
goes
Yeah.
You know, um [clears throat] so I think
that it's not unlikely that this could
have been a a venerated monument in
pre-dynastic times. It's obvious that it
would have been there. Um, and there's
another spot on the Giza Plateau
down on the southeastern side near
what's called the worker's tombs. It's
this uh uh I think it's it's near Kent
Coway's pyramid. Uh, and it's really not
much of a pyramid anymore. All the
stones were taken away. I mean, it's not
even you can't even see it as a pyramid
anymore. It's completely unrecognizable.
But down in there, there's this little
piece of the limestone that's eroded in
this really strange way where when you
walk up to it, it looks like the back of
another sphinx head. It's still there
today. And you can tell that if that's
what that formation, what the sphinx
head used to look like. It used was some
weird rock formation. You can see how
someone would turn it into something.
You know, you could you could mistake it
for for a head. Um
anyways, I don't know what the Sphinx
originally looked like. It sure as hell
looks like it it used to be a lion and
that the lion's head was shaved down and
turned into something else.
That's what Graham Hancock and Robert
Shock think is that um when the
procession was in Leo or whatever, it
was made as you know a lion as kind of
you know paying homage and then uh the
feronic headdress was sort of
retrofitted onto it, you know, based on
you know Egyptian customs. So I don't
know.
Well, and I don't think that that's a a
completely crazy idea. the the the best
thing that would substantiate that is if
we could figure out a means by which um
the labeling of constellations is
preserved over the course of 10,000
years. You know, how far back does
astrology go? You know, I would love to
I would love to find some kind of
evidence of people really far back in
history recognizing the same
constellation.
Well, that it's funny. That's always the
most fantastical thing that I think
people like Robert Shock or Graham
Hancock say that to me it's either not
real or if it's real then you have to
get into onlogically trippy territory
visa v people from the stars or
something because they're talking about
monuments being made over cosmic time
scales based on processions and stuff
paying homage to you know star
alignments and so I mean maybe the aams
razor explanation for that is like you
have a lot of time to like stare at the
sky or something. So like that becomes
like a way more part and pul part and
parcel of any ancient culture
but there might be I don't know it's
still crazy. It's still really
fascinating.
I I was having the same conversation. Um
so I was telling you yesterday I I was
out in uh Big Ben, Texas. For anybody
watching, Big Bend is just this huge
national or state park in in West Texas
where you have 100% visibility of the
night sky. And you go out there and it's
just daunting. It reminds you of how
small and insignificant and of a speck
you are in all reality. And I was
talking to my buddies while I'm out
there and they probably get tired of
hearing me talk about ancient history
and you know the cosmic scale of
everything. And um but I you know I find
it fascinating and and um I was telling
them you know imagine this is at least
30% of human reality until we create
lights that just you know have an insane
amount of light pollution and we can't
see the stars anymore. You know at least
30% of our lives was supposed to be
sitting underneath the night sky looking
up at the night sky. What kind of
psychological effect does that hap does
that have on us negatively that removes
us from the way that we were intended to
experience the world, you know? And so I
I think that a caveat to saying that I'd
love um a caveat to saying that I would
love to see evidence of of the
recognition of constellations be
preserved throughout, you know,
thousands of years. A caveat to that is
that um maybe human beings are just all
wired the same, you know, and that can
get into a whole other thing where um
I was in Mexico. I was I was at this ch
site called Lventa. I'm standing at at
the base of the Great Pyramid of Lamenta
and I've been down and I'm looking at
this these ant hills and um and I I
realize like these antills have streets
in the middle of them. These are leaf
cutter ants. Um, they have these I think
they're leaf ants. They have these
streets in the middle of them and and
these highways like go off into the
jungle and across like the the flat
ground and they've got these big ant
mound pyramids and I realized like, oh,
this looks exactly like a Mesoamerican
city. I mean, exactly like it. And it
just dawned on me, well, what if human
beings witnessed this and saw that this
is like a a civilization grid layout and
then they modeled themselves after ants.
But then it also thought about the fact
that it doesn't matter where you put
ants on the planet, they will do that
because that makes the most sense. And
so is it like because they're all wired
the same. They're the same organism,
right? And they they do the same things.
Uh in the same way that the other day I
was uh I was in my kitchen and I make
these uh I make these like Chick-fil-A
grilled uh or Chick-fil-A chicken
sandwiches and I'll make the breading by
hand. And so I'll get like corn flakes
and I'll crush them up in my hand. Well,
after a while, your hands get rubbed
sore from crushing these kernels. And
so, I have it in this bowl and I look
around. I'm like, what's something hard
I can just use to crush this instead?
And so, I grab like a seasoning thing
and I start grinding it down. And it
just realized I I invented a mortar and
pestle in my own kitchen without
thinking about it. Why? Because I'm
wired that way. I'm wired to do that,
you know. Um, and people all over the
world invented mortar and pestle
independently, right? So um
often at the same times
often at the same time
with the wheel and you know all these
sort of inventions seem to pop up in
disperate cultures that don't have
contact at the same time. It's
fascinating.
Yeah. And and if you look at us on the
scale, I think I think one thing is is
there's a lot of magic and mystery to
our reality. But then at the same time,
some things can just be simple like you
know it is hard for us to understand
each other because we and understand our
our psychological processes and cuz we
look at each other at eye level. Um but
when we look down on ants, it's pretty
easy to understand why they work the way
they do. So, like try to take another
step back and look down on human beings
as if we're ants. And the explanation is
simple is because we're all the same
being, you know what I mean? Um,
I think I think that that's I think
that's very interesting.
And we have information encoded in us.
Like if you look at DNA, you can store
like a book on DNA. You can store
semantic information on DNA. It's it is
a hard drive of sorts. And like you know
semiconductors or transistors you know
certain chunks of DNA can be activated
and deactivated via methylation and
acetilation. And so uh yeah I think you
know a lot of people believe in sort of
this idea of transmission theory of
consciousness that maybe we are like
antenni for something higher or
whatever.
Well didn't Tesla he he like directly
says that right he thought his brain was
an antenna for ideas.
That would make sense if you read his
book my inventions or whatever. It's
like he just visualizes these exper
he'll he'll like
he'll work through an entire experiment
in his head before doing a thing.
Um so I believe he he he said that. Um
yeah it's it's fascinating. I think
you'd need a new model of um
electronamics because these things kind
of you know a signal would attenuate too
quickly or something. You put somebody
inside a Faraday chamber they can still
think right. Uh but uh I mean it's it's
probably the ultimate hubris to say that
we have you know we're at the end of
history as far as our physical models of
how these things work.
And I think yeah it's there's a lot to
lead one to believe that there's sort of
a a client server relationship. There's
you know we're the clients that's server
or something we're sort of we're
download even look at base pairs of DNA
or you know AGCT and it's always it's
they're called base pairs because it's
always the same combination. So it's
like ones and zeros on
you know semiconductor. Let's talk about
something a lot of us quietly deal with.
Hair loss. This is something that messes
with your confidence more than you'd
expect. Okay, you might be wondering,
Jesse, you clearly don't suffer from
this. It's true. The biggest issue I
face is hat hair. I actually have very
thick hair, but one of my good friends
deals with hair loss. So, when I Restore
sent me their I Restore Elite, I gifted
it to him, and I've been amazed at the
results it gave him. The first thing
that stood out to him is it's
comfortable and easy to use. You just
pop it on while reading or working and
it does its thing. This isn't some
gimmick. It uses 300 lasers and 200 LEDs
to deliver clinically backed red light
therapy straight to the scalp. This is
the best way to stimulate hair growth.
Over the past few weeks, I've seen
noticeable improvement with my friend.
He says that his hair feels thicker and
healthier and it's improved his overall
confidence in life. The I restore Elite
uses triple wavelength technology and
Lumat red light therapy. It's engineered
for deeper penetration and broader
coverage. That means more stimulation to
hair follicles and better, faster
results. And look, if it doesn't work
for you, they offer a 12month money back
guarantee. I've never heard of a money
back guarantee that lasts that long. Try
it consistently, and if you're not
happy, they get you your money back. Of
course, the restocking fee applies. That
made it a no-brainer for my friend. So,
give yourself the gift of hair
confidence this spring. For a limited
time only, our listeners get a huge
discount on i restore elite when you use
code Jesse Jes at i restore.com. Head
over to i restore.com and use code jesse
jes ssse for our show's exclusive
discounts on the I restore elite. Please
support our show and tell them we sent
you. Hair loss is frustrating. You don't
have to fight it alone thanks to I
restore. It's fascinating.
Yeah. Yeah. I I I think I think just
capping off the Sphinx thing, um you
know, there were there were cultures
that existed prior to the unification of
of Egypt
and and really all that was in a in a
simple way is
you have a bunch of people who migrate
to Egypt uh when the Sahara dries up,
you only have a few places to go. You
have this huge green Sahara 10,000 years
ago or 12,000 years ago and it starts
drying up over the course of about 5,000
years. And you know these Saharans only
have a few choices to make. They can go
to the Mediterranean coast, they can go
to to the Atlantic coast, they can go
down towards the Congo and the savas or
they can go to this huge river to the
east. And the people who go to this
river to the east, this fertile oasis,
um, which is the Nile River, they are
packed into this, you know, on the on
the east side there's a mile wide of
really lush fertile terrain. On the west
side there's a mile wide as well. And
you have this really compacted area and
they're all living on they're all living
on top of each other. And so they are
not able to have this roaming nomadic
lifestyle that they used to where you
could have your herds of cattle and you
could have them graze on this grass and
graze on this grass and you just go up
and down the Sahara, you know, or back
and forth on the Sahara. Now you have to
invent sedentary lifestyle. Um, and that
blossoms into civilization because
people are living on top of each other.
But it doesn't just start that there's
like one guy who can rule over the whole
Nile. It's the strongest I mean
literally the strongest guy in each
little compacted area. So we call them
chieftains and we have a little bit of
evidence for them but we we kind of just
assume well this probably did happen. Um
but you have these chieftains that rule
in these little areas and then those
chieftains war against each other and
the territories you know one guy
conquers the other his territory
doubles. Well, eventually you end up in
this period called the two lands which
is uh lower Egypt which is which is in
the north because the Nile runs north.
So the lower end of the Nile River is in
the north, upper Egypt is in the south.
And all the unification of Egypt was was
when both areas had completely unified
into their own kingdom. This the king of
the southern kingdom marched his army
north and smited the king of the
northern kingdom. And I'm sure you've
seen this pose before where it's this
pharaoh grabbing the hair of a man and
he's got his scepter in the air and he's
about to crush his head in. Well, that's
a pose that every pharaoh did for the
next 3,000 years. That's the unification
of it. Inside
both lands, you have all these different
subcultures of people. Like you have the
Bedarian culture, the Mi culture, uh the
Nata culture, it goes on and on and on.
[clears throat]
Well, you have the Mi culture that lived
in the area of Giza. And I've always
thought that it it was perfectly
possible that the Sphinx could have been
their god or some kind of representation
of some divine celestial deity, maybe
Leo, you know, something along those
lines. Um, that was a carved out and
venerated lion uh monument that had been
venerated long before the pyramids were
ever there, before anything else was
ever there. that this could have been a
venerated monument. And I've like often
said like, yeah, there could have been
some kind of sphinx cult, some kind of
lion cult that existed there long before
the pyramids were ever there. Um, so
that's more of my belief. When exactly
that is, Robert Shock's first estimate
was anywhere between 5 and 7,000 BC, I
believe. And then he pushed it back
further um because he had some other uh
evidence that that seemed to align
better. Um, I would be I wouldn't really
feel crazy about saying that that the
Sphinx could be 5 to 7,000 BC. Going
beyond that, I don't know. Um, but it
certainly seems like something that is
incredibly old. The water erosion around
the enclosure just doesn't make a lot of
sense. I've seen so many people attempt
to debunk it, and I've I've openly
listened to it. Um, but I just don't see
a convincing argument for the Sphinx
being 2450 BC. Yeah.
Uh, oh, here's another thing. Yeah.
Is um, the pharaoh Tutmos IV uh, from
the new kingdom. Let's call this Tutmos
IV is probably born around 1350 BC.
And when he's there, the um, he he well
during his reign, he erected something
called the dream stella. And it was him
talking about how when he was a young
kid before he became Pharaoh, he went
and slept under um the shade of the
Sphinx and the Sphinx visited him in a
dream and said you the the the Sphinx
essentially tells him through what we
can translate, you know, I used to rule
over the desert and now the desert
disrespects me and rules over me and
it's covered my you know enclosure. Free
me from this and I will make you the the
pharaoh of Egypt. So Tutmos does this in
about 1350 BC. So what this says is that
around a thousand years after the
youngest date of of the uh the sphinx
being cut out, it was already covered up
and buried. So in that thousand years,
really less than that, all that water
erosion had to have occurred. It's not
possible. It's just not possible for for
that kind of water erosion to occur
because what they'll say, what
scientists will say is, well, you know,
it's been uh it's been 44 4,500 years
since the Sphinx was cut out. That kind
of erosion can certainly happen in that
period. No, that's totally ignoring the
fact that a thousand years later, Tutmos
IV says it was covered, says it had
filled in and he had to excavate all of
it and clean out the Sphinx enclosure to
become the pharaoh. So really, it's in
like, let's call it 5 to 800, 900 years
all that had to be filled in. It's just
not the logic just doesn't work.
Um, and so I think I think it's
perfectly plausible that the Sphinx goes
back further.
Fascinating.
Yeah. two crazy questions that I know
are on everybody's mind. One is how were
the pyramids built, maybe impossible to
answer, but um you have, you know, uh uh
Houdan in in in France saying that it
was built from the inside out. You have
other theories that, you know, water was
used. The the big question is how are
these sort of 20, 30, 40 ton, you know,
uh uh uh uh granite blocks moved from
the, you know, Aswan River Valley 500
miles away. And then the second question
is you talk to you know Graham Hancock
and he says that he says adamantly he's
like the pyramids were not just a tomb
they were you know something else and
you know maybe like some sort of like
celestial ascent chamber portal thing.
Uh you know you have Christopher Dunn
saying that they were an energy
generation machine.
Um so how are they built
and what were they used for? Impossible
to answer.
Sure. [laughter] Um, [clears throat] so,
uh, just putting out this out there, you
know, my main interest is not
architecture or engineering. I find the
the mystery of how they were built
compelling. Uh, I don't spend really
much time studying it. More of my
interest is is
how are ancient people interacting with
the pyramids? What is their lives like
during the time of the pyramids? What is
their relationship to the pyramids like?
I find that that personal aspect really
interesting and and it sheds a it gives
a um a very fleshy alive feeling to the
ancient world that really gets
overlooked in in this space because
there's so many people who are already
talking about you know going through the
logistics of the engineering and stuff
and that's very interesting but there's
the human thing that can that grips you
and connects you to it
well what what I mean that definitely
connects with the possible why of how
these things were built so
um but as far as the how I I've looked
into this. Um the water theory I I've
heard about the blocks being floated up,
but I don't know how that's feasible.
Yeah, I don't either
cuz you would have to
you would have to drown all of Egypt to
get water that high. Um blocks may have
been well I mean they definitely were
floated on boats along the Nile. Um but
uh you know I when I really think about
it practically
I think that some kind of
some kind of there there's this idea of
the internal ramp theory. Have you heard
of this? Yes. Where it starts at one
corner and it just barely goes up.
This is whoan this French guy.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um when I really
try to think about it practically I
can't think of anything better than
that. But then you get to a point where
you're getting so high up on the
pyramid, you know, at when you get to
the king's chamber, which is a made
which is made entirely out of the azwan
granite stones. Uh you know, the the
vast majority of the stones on the
pyramid are limestone and and they're
sourced from right next to the pyramid.
You can see the quaries next to the
pyramid. Um then the casing stones are
tur limestone which are I think are 15
miles south uh found on the opposite
side of the river. And we have a we have
a ledger of those being brought up to
Giza. It's it's called the diary of
Morer. Um and and he says that he's
bringing these Tur limestone blocks up
to the horizon of Kufu. Now granted, we
don't really know what the horizon of
Kufu is. Maybe it's the Giza plateau,
but I've also heard it propos it could
just as easily be like Kufu's palace,
which is lost. We don't know where
Kufu's palace was. Um anywh who uh we do
know that they're tur limestone that
come from south of Giza. Um so those are
the three types of stones.
Now it's not in it's not really
infeasible as to how they move giant
limestone blocks. I mean as even as big
as it is it's only like 2 and a half
tons. You can move that. But it's the
80ton ton red granite stones that have
to be hoisted up 140 ft into the, you
know, up from the ground and placed into
the ceiling of the king's chamber.
Yes. I mean, I can sort of see how you
could build half of a pyramid with an
internal ramp, but when you go when you
get to the second half and everything is
so steep and tightly compacted, I don't
know how you finish that job, you know?
Um, but but granted,
have you ever heard of the guy named
Wally Wallington before?
No, but I love that name.
He's he's the dude that uh maybe you've
seen his videos before where he erected
Stonehinge in his backyard by himself.
Cool.
So, he's moving these 100 ton stones
like on a single pivot point by himself.
Wow.
Now, this will get thrown out there by,
you know, you know there's people who
are like professional debunkers, like
archaeologists that their whole YouTube
channel is just debunking.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
And so they'll say, "Oh, it's no mystery
as to how these huge stones were moved.
Look at Wally Wallington doing it."
Well, Wally Wallington's not building a
pyramid. He's not putting these stones
150 feet into the air.
Yeah. At the same time though, if you
have 500 W-Ally Wallingtons working for
500 years, you can probably build a
pyramid. Sure. Um,
and so I think what I'm getting at here
is
But isn't the fourth dynasty 200 years?
Well, it it so here's the thing is that
the fourth dynasty, you know, there's
there's this idea that the that the
pyramids like spring out of nowhere. It
just boom, they arrive.
Well, it's kind of true, but at the same
time, you know, the fourth dynasty is
this 200-year period, let's say roughly
2650 to to 2450,
but they were arriving the the if you if
we go from the end of the third dynasty
to dynasty zero. Well, that's 2650 all
the way back to 3,100 BC. So, now we
have
500 600 years of history and
stonemasonry leading up to this
explosion of of architecture. So you
have a 500year period where we can see a
progression of architecture getting
bigger and bigger and bigger and more
monumental but then there is a jump in
the in the fourth dynasty where it's
like they just
it's like they figured out flight or
something. You know how you know how we
like we figured out you know what is it
in 1911 we figure out flight or 1910 and
then just boom you know everything
explodes. It's like that. There's this
progression and then boom, it just
exploded.
Stealth aircraft that
Exactly. Costa.
Yeah. And and so take take our evolution
of technology, how we go, let's call it
the 1500s, technology goes like this and
then boom, 1900 it just explodes. It was
just ready.
Well, think about stonemasonry in Egypt.
It was progressing for so long and then
all of a sudden Egypt has this
incredible amount of power and they just
explode in capability. It's like this
endless capacity of monumental
architecture. Yeah.
Um,
and we can get into that and the more
I've studied it, the more I have
explained to myself the rationale of
like how these things happen, but it
isn't in line with stuff I learn from
academics, which I constantly get
accused of of like of, you know,
drinking through the straw of academia.
I I hardly have any connections in
academia. I'm friends with approximately
one academic who's Dr. Ed Barnhard. I
just study this a lot and make and I
look at the evidence and make it make
sense in my head. Um, now getting to
building the pyramids. Yes, I think that
with five or six hundred years of expert
stonemasons, they developed an
understanding of how to move, lift,
carve, cut, transport megaliths in a way
that even 5,000 years later, we we don't
understand this. It gets to a certain
point where it's like we it's it seems
infeasible to us, but they probably had
all kinds of tricks and like genius
nuances. I mean, I think the best way I
can describe this is they knew they had
a they had a a perfect natural
non-upgradable
technology and and use of techniques,
right? Like perfect, natural, and
non-upgradable. And when it's done,
there's no evidence of how they did it
because it was so clean, right? Like the
finished product is there, but the
evidence of how they did it is gone
because they were that good at it,
right? That's kind of the way that that
that I explain it to myself. So, I think
that a ramp only gets you so far. I
don't know what the next steps are. I
don't know how you finish it. I don't
know how you get the casing stones that
slide perfectly in place up at the top
of the pyramid with a capstone sitting
up on top of it. That's another thing is
a lot of people don't know. A lot of
people think that there Egyptologists
think there never was a capstone. I
think there almost certainly was. Um but
I think the ramp theory only gets you so
far. Beyond that, I don't know.
Yeah, I do think in some ways the why is
more interesting than the how.
Mhm. It's like why, you know, it's like
clearly so much effort
for this thing that does seem sort of
timeless and is fascinating and it's
amazing when you go, but it's like
it's in just an inordinate amount of of
of effort and techniques that, you know,
we can't readily explain, you know,
uh, Wall-E. Wall-ally or not. What's his
last name? Wall-ally.
Wally Wall-ally.
Wally Wallington or not. Yeah, exactly.
Well, you're really more I mean, I
appreciate you um you know, indulging
all my Egypt based questions, but you're
really more of an America's guy
generally. Is that right? Or
um No, actually I I uh
I [clears throat] heard you say that on
podcast, so I'm just repeating it, but
yeah. [laughter] Yeah. Well, you know,
there there were there were periods
where where yes, that was my expertise
at that time. [sighs]
the the way it started was um so my
grandfather was a was a missionary and
he was but he was also like a historian
of the ancient world and this is my
grandfather on my mom's side. So I had
this influence of this explorer on my
dad's side but then I had a missionary
and like a biblical historian uh on my
on my mother's side. Both of those
influenced me. I was always a classical
guy. Classical would mean uh Egypt,
Greece and Rome. um more so Egypt and
Greece. Um that was always my interest
and and a little bit of the of the holy
land of the biblical world. Um as far as
my future career in the Americas,
um I will still still do expeditions um
in the Americas and carrying out
exploration here. But I think it's going
to be in North America. I think it's
going to be in the in the US. There's a
lot left in the US. I mean there
like where
uh I can't say specifically.
Interesting. But uh uh Florida, Georgia,
South Carolina, Alabama,
um
West Texas, Mexico, I can't tell exactly
where. Um but yeah. Yeah, there's
there's a lot left. I mean, there are
there are entire I call them cities, but
they're like small ancient cities that
have never been discovered that are in
the United States. Absolutely.
Yeah.
Crazy.
100%.
And are you working with Ed Barnhart on
this stuff?
Interesting.
Yeah. I have never talked about this
publicly before. Um, he and I may have
barely touched on it when we were on
Danny Jones together, but uh,
I've never really talked about this in
depth before.
How old are we talking?
It ranges, you know, some are a thousand
years, some can be 5,000, 6,000 years
old.
Wow.
Yeah. There's a there's a there's an
ancient city in Texas that was
discovered recently that's 10,000 years
old next to this river. Yeah. Yeah. Do
you think and you know we have this
narrative that's been popularized in
anthropology that's like sort of
primitive to progress. Do you think that
some of these ancient civilizations
outside of the you know evidence we have
in Egypt and other places like that
and outside of the woowoo thinking a lot
of people like to kind of engage in
do you think that there are
civilizations that were just way more
advanced that than meets the eye? Like
for example, you look at the Amazon and
you know it's it's so undiscovered still
like and what if we was talking to
Graham Hancock about like lidaring you
know the over over the the treetops of
the Amazon forest and you can see the
topology and then you see little
geoglyphs kind of popping out and then
you go down and we're doing this all the
time and finding all sorts of crazy
stuff and so
you know if archaeology as a field is
only you know a little under 200 years
old you where we we we found you know
Assyria, Babylonia you know 200 years
ago. Isn't there sort of a law in
archaeology that the the farther you go
the longer you go the older civilization
actually gets and go back is just the
tip of the iceberg and
you have a lot more advanced stuff
that's we're going to uncover that's you
know way older and maybe civilization is
more like an S-curve and not like this
hockey stick you know thing.
Well yeah I would I would absolutely say
it's an S-curve. I mean, ancient Greece
is a perfect example of that. You have
the height of the Bronze Age, then you
have the Troj, you know, you have the
Trojan War, and then the Trojans war
seems to coincide with the fall of the
Bronze Age. Greece falls into the dark,
you know, the dark period, and then it
comes out of the archaic period. So, you
have this huge dip in, you know, uh, in
their technological capabilities.
There's no more writing anymore, um,
during for some of that period. That's
just one perfect example. That same
thing also happened in Egypt where you
have these long periods of centuries
where nothing is happening. It's like
this it's like this invisible dark
period where we don't have any more
literature or anything. Now those are on
micro scales but like a macro scale yeah
I mean definitely there have to be
periods where civilization as a whole is
flourishing and then everything crashes.
A macro scale would also be like the
collapse of the bronze age. I mean, all
around the eastern Mediterranean, every
ancient civilization was heavily
impacted or their their infrastructure
collapsed and had to recover. That's on
a macro scale. Um, like a ultra macro
scale if we're looking at civilization
all across the world. Yeah. Yeah. There
there definitely had to be periods where
things happen that that impact society
like stun it or you know like stuns
progression or you know completely
eliminates humanity. Um nobody knows
exactly what was going on during the ice
age. But I guarantee you that the North
Atlantic ice cap and this dramatic event
that that inst I say instantly but
rapidly ended the ice age. I mean it
eviscerated North America. The reason
that we don't go to uh
you know when you go to a zoo there's
never a North America section. You know
what do we have in North America? We
have bears, deer, foxes,
rabbits.
Not a whole lot else.
Snakes.
Snakes. Well, sure. Yeah, you have that
like in in the aquariums or whatever.
Not the aquarium, whatever. Um, but uh
you don't have a North American section
because we lost so much of our megapa at
the end of the ice age. But man, we used
to have giant sloths. We had woolly
mammoths and elephants. We had large
saber-tooth cats. We had the shortfaced
bear. We had the American lion, which
was twice the size of the African lion.
I mean, we had so much wildlife here and
it was all destroyed. It just
disappeared at the end of the ice age.
Now, sometimes they say that they were
all hunted to extinction by, you know,
nomadic people. I I just spoke to an
evolutionary biologist last week, and he
and I were both like, h I mean, humanity
had been around for over a 100,000 years
before that. You don't think during that
100,000year period, humanity was able to
realize if we kill off our food source,
the food source doesn't exist anymore?
Yeah, it doesn't make sense to me. And
it's like, what do you have like spears
at the time? Are you really like
extinct?
Spears and and bow and arrows.
Bow and arrows. But are you extincting
woolly mammoths with that technology? I
don't know. That's
I don't think you're eviscerating entire
populations of it. I It just doesn't
seem feasible to me. And human beings
um they were ignorant to the things that
we know today. Yeah. But they weren't
ignorant to their natural world. And
what's what is the pillar of their world
is their food source. It's the pillar.
As far as we know, agriculture doesn't
exist at this point. They are hunting
animals and living side by side.
So you think there was an extinction
event like some some larger?
Absolutely. Absolutely.
So yeah, I mean this brings up a
question which is, you know, you brought
up Luis Walter Alvarez. You know, he had
this theory that an asteroid hit the
earth 66 million years ago and that
caused, you know, dinosaurs to go
extinct. Uh you now have Randall Carlson
and Graham Hancock talking about the
younger Gius you know impact theory that
you know um uh comet impact from the it
was an air burst I guess in their
opinion from the torid meteor stream you
know hit the earth's atmosphere and then
caused you know the ice age and then
also brought us out of the ice age.
Is there something that you Luke Caverns
believe will get proved down the line?
You have a big bold hypothesis
and
it could be on anything. It doesn't have
to be on an extinction event, but I
always think, you know, it's a very
interesting my my uh former employer
Peter Teal has a question which is
what's the thing that you believe that
very else very few other people agree
with you on. So, what's something your
high conviction on that no one else
agrees with you on? And you know, you're
at the tender age of 27, so maybe you
don't need a great answer to this
question, but
you know, about 5 years ago, no, it's
been longer than that now. It's been
it's been like it's been like 10 years
ago, I started um
I started asking myself really hard
questions about Christianity. Uh I was
raised Christian. um still am,
but I I'm writing a video right now uh
titled Why I'm No Longer a Modern
Christian, like quotations. And um and
in studying the ancient world and really
in studying the Americas, it changed my
perspective on so much.
You know, uh modern-day Christians, 21st
century, first world Christians have are
so ignorant of of like the grand scale
or large scale humanity. Um and they
almost never juxtapose that or try to
compare it or rationalize it with their
religious beliefs. This can this can go
in so many different directions. Like
even as simply as a direction of okay,
why did God only present himself to a
small minority of people living on the
Eastern Mediterranean 2,000 years ago
when civilization was already blossoming
all across the Americas? What about
people in the Americas? What happens to
them? Well, you really never get an
explanation from that from your average
Christian or even like your
exceptionally educated Christian. These
are just hard questions that most never
ask themselves. Uh, another thing is
[clears throat]
you [snorts] always hear a Christian say
there's only one God. There's only one
God. Um, but they never go beyond that
because the Bible clearly states that
there's more than one God. Clearly
states that. I mean, even God himself,
the Hebrew God, Yahweh,
recognizes and acknowledges the
existence of the gods of Egypt. in in
Exodus, he tells Moses that he's going
to execute his I think it's Exodus 12,
he tells him that he's going to execute
his wrath on the gods of Egypt. And even
during the Genesis uh story, um you
know, there's this there's an
interesting thing that happens here
where it seems like uh I say I say it
seems like I'm not I'm not saying this
is what it is, but it seems like God
doesn't tell the truth to Adam and Eve
because he tells Adam, you know, don't
eat from the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, for you you're you will
surely die. And then the the serpent,
you know, comes to Eve and and uh
essentially tells her like, "What do you
mean that that you'll surely die? You're
not going to die. He's afraid that if
you eat this tree, you'll become like
him." Which is odd. And then Adam and
Eve eat from the tree, which I have my
own idea of what I think that that tree
is. And then God's immediate reaction to
that is he turns to this divine council,
this mysterious council full of other
beings in heaven. That's way very much
often overlooked. And he says, "Behold,
man has become like us." So they didn't
die, they became like God. So it's like
weird that God didn't It's like God
didn't tell them the truth. Or is it
that they died that their innocence
died? That can be a whole other That can
be a whole other thing. Um, and I don't
have a hard opinion about that, but
these were hard questions I was asking
myself. And then I came to the
realization during this period. And I
was like, I was like, if I'm going to be
a Christian, I have to I have to
rationalize and accept some of these
beliefs.
And when God in
in the Old Testament acknowledges the
existence of the gods of Egypt and says
he's going to cast his judgment on them,
does that mean that the gods of Egypt
are real? Does that mean that these
experiences
that the Egyptian priests and um and
that the Pharaoh are having that they so
commonly talk about these gods coming
and speaking to them and and they
they're convicted with this purpose of
this thing that they have to do which
seems so bizarre to us like you know uh
people who are fans of the Atlantis hunt
if you try to talk to them about ancient
religion and say well you know these are
spiritual people these are very
religious people that are convicted they
go oh come on man nobody would do that
they I do it if it's really happening.
And um and that is that's something I
almost never talk about
because I I don't know quite how to
explain it. But I I certainly think that
when you look at all of these temples in
Egypt, you look at uh the obelisk of
Hatchepsuit where at the top of the
obelisk and at the bottom of the obelisk
like right at eye level, you can go up
to it and read it. and I've read the
translated hieroglyphs and she said she
said um she said [clears throat] as for
this obelisk it's something I'm
paraphrasing but it's like as for this
obelisk I erected this uh from um from
electrum which was just like gold and
and uh and your wealth so she paid to
have these two obelisk erected she said
like any good king would for their
father Ammoon which is this god and she
goes on to talk about how she did this
for the god and everything and then at
the temple of Luxor the back chamber was
a chamber. This Yeah, you've been to it.
So, this huge chamber, you go to it at
night. It's the one that's always lit up
at night.
That huge chamber in the back, as far as
we know, was reserved only for Aman
Hotep to connect to his father, Aman
Rah, the the god.
And I'm sitting I'm standing there in in
the middle of this back chamber that not
even the priests are allowed in, only
the pharaoh. And I'm thinking,
was this whole temple built for Aman
Hotep to enter it and not come face to
face with Aman Rah? Mhm.
It wasn't actually happening. This is
all made up.
Yeah. Why would you spend so much effort
and
this whole temple is here for nothing?
No, it's not.
Look at I mean everything that just the
Egyptians achieved. Then let's jump over
to ancient Greece. Look at all the
temples that that they that they
erected.
Look at everything that they did on
behalf on behalf of their gods. I mean
so significant to the point that
Leonitis goes to visit the Oracle of
Deli to determine as to whether or not
they should fight against the Persians.
I mean they really believed in the gods.
They actually believed in them.
Um and I've heard I've heard Greek uh
professors say that you know these women
who would become uh like as the vapors
came up under the ground of Deli and the
woman would become possessed with the
spirit of Zeus. And I've heard um a
Greek um um historian, you know, college
professor say, "I don't mean this in any
symbolic or spiritual sense.
I'm telling you that this literally
happened.
That the woman was literally possessed
with the spirit of Zeus." And that was
absolutely jarring for me to hear that
from a from a professor. He wasn't
kidding at all. He's like, "It's not
spiritual. It's not metaphysical. It's
or it's not metaphorical. It is actually
happening. And um and he talked about
these other women that would become
possessed by the gods and they'd run
around naked on these mountain sides and
everything and he was like they'd wake
up the next day and not remember
anything. He's like it's not an
exaggeration. It was actually happening.
Yeah.
And um you look at the Americas, man.
All these ancient temples and sites that
were erected on behalf of these god
beings. It's every ancient culture
um recognizes these gods that exist on
our planet. And I think that my hill
that I that I would die on, if there is
one, is that ancient people were not
making it up.
Yeah. I love that
they weren't making it up.
Well, it's an assertion of modernity to
say that they were. It's just as much an
assertion to say that they were. And
then like we don't know. It's It's
really impossible to say. And then if
you were to put yourselves in their
shoes, like it seems like they actually
weren't making it up. Like they weren't
talking about it in mythological terms.
Yeah,
there's a guy named Julian James. I
don't know if you've heard of him. He
was a um Yale professor. He wrote a book
called um uh on the origins of
consciousness and the bicamal mind. And
um he used to say that uh you know we we
like uh uh basically we shifted towards
leftbrain thinking um and and and and we
have this modern divided brain but that
was really that really occurred post
1000 BC and it's this very kind of
Gestalt big history view it might be
very imperfect but
post 1000 BC
1000 BC and he was kind of laughed out
of the room but there are people who
definitely take him you know pretty
pretty seriously today. Do you remember
why exactly it says post 1000?
I don't. I have to go back and read the
book. But even if you look at the new
the old testament that God speaks you
know directly through signs and through
you know you know uh uh you know yeah
great great signs or Sodom and Gomorrah
destruction in many cases uh and then uh
he speaks through prophets and then he
sort of goes away and so there is
something about uh the ark of God even
in the Bible himself and then he has to
sort of anthropomorphize himself in the
form of Jesus in the New Testament. Um,
so there is this arc of, you know,
direct intervention to leaving. Um, and
that, you know, begs all sorts of really
interesting interesting questions. So I
I'm I'm with you. Also, it's like we
were we were talking about the why, you
know, on a lot of these like really
crazy mega structures, and it's like
maybe you'd be way more motivated if
these gods were actually real to you.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, and that's the
thing about uh that's the thing about
the pyramids is, [sighs and gasps] you
know, even I cringe at the idea of a of
a a structure that massive
being erected and prepared for the
burial of a single man. I cringe at that
idea because it's hard for me to fathom
somebody, you know, I inherently have a
negative perception of that person that
it's being built for. you know, like if
uh
like if there was some guy today, like
let's say Jeff Bezos wanted a wanted a
pyramid for his own burial, I I just
think that's like it's gross, right?
Um but at the same time,
for someone
in the modern day to immediately dismiss
that as a possibility, uh it's like it's
like an arrogance of modernity, right?
Because okay, I I would ask that person.
I see this all the time in my comment
section, the comment section of every
video. You know, nobody would do this
for for, you know, whatever. Okay, I
would I would tell that person, okay,
please dive into the mindset of somebody
living in the early 1900s for me.
Yeah, it'd be really hard.
Okay, please dive into the mindset of
somebody living in the early 1800s for
me. and let's go back every single
century and go let's go back 47
centuries and please dive in and tell me
logically how they're working to you
read you read Pride and Prejudice and
you're like this is the weird Victorian
you know is like you're looking across
the room and you have you know Darcy and
all character like you read that and
that's like oh that's like another
planet you go to Tokyo now and you're on
like another planet or something you
know it's like so different from
American culture and so yeah completely
yeah 2,000 I think what I think happens
is we psychologically spend so much time
with this time period that you feel more
connected to it than you are and you
have this like cognitive dissonance
because you're forgetting how
disconnected you are from these people.
You are becoming so familiarized with
the data that you have been exposed to
and you spend so much time with it that
you develop such a connection to it that
you you have to remind yourself you have
to constantly keep a reminder that you
are so incredibly disconnected from
these people. So disconnected that it
doesn't matter. Like I've tried to tell
people the difference between as far as
our connection to the pyramid builders
between 4,700 years ago and 12,000 years
ago, they may as well be the same. Yeah.
Because we're that disconnected from
them. It doesn't make much of a
difference. Um, and that's the thing is
is trying to come up with a rationale
behind why they did it is fascinating,
but to have such a strong opinion over
it is ridiculous and foolish. And it
doesn't matter if you think that they
were tombs or not.
Being so tied to your opinion that you
can so quickly dis dismiss someone
else's opinion or say that anything is
ridiculous is foolish because you can't
even tell me the rationale behind people
living 100 years ago. You know, it's
like you think you're an expert. You
think you can possibly know something
4,700 years ago. You can't. Yeah. You
know, so that's why there has to be
there needs to be this like moderate
tone coming in where hey, this is the
evidence that I personally am aware of
and that I have studied. This is what I
think makes sense, but there's so much
else out there.
Yeah. And many of the historical kings
themselves were merged with divinity.
Angoten is a good example. It's like the
sun god, you know, and or even up to,
you know, uh, Louis the 14th, he was the
sun god in the French context, but was
literally ruling under divine right. And
that was not like some metaphor. It
wasn't some joke that was, you know, he
was seen as sort of godlike.
Well, Henry V, he's he believed that he
was the conduit of God himself. That he
was performing
he was performing the will of God to
expand England's, you know, kingdom. I
mean, yeah. Yeah. This this idea of of,
you know, your king being the direct
conduit of God himself can have a
tremendous impact on a on a
civilization. this was happening in the
fourth dynasty too. Um you know prior to
that [gasps]
there was an element of piousness
that the you know pious means that it
means just being uh having a reverence
for like a certain deity um having a
respect for a deity
submitting to a deity to a certain deity
in a way or a religion in a way
there's this element of piousness but
then in the fourth dynasty that is still
there but there's an elevation of the of
the king or the pharaoh's status where
he is now becoming merged with the god.
And I've often wondered and I I don't
really see this proposed by any
Egyptologist. Um but I often wonder, you
know, prior to the great pyramids,
people don't realize this tomb building
is this is this um it's either a
vertical shaft going straight into the
ground or it's a shaft that goes about
45 degrees into the ground. The exact
opposite is true with the pyramids. if
if we're to assume that those are um
that those are tombs. And I mean, here's
here's like a like a simple thing. I
know people don't like the tomb idea.
Sometimes I cringe at it as well. Um
there are sarcophagus sarcophagi in the
chamber. Like if you're getting if
you're going to now explain to me why
that's not a sarcophagus. You're really
getting out there now, you know. Um
I'm not opposed to that, but I'm just
saying that's the reality of it. And the
sarcophagi are too big for the entrance
way. So they're not brought in later.
They were placed in the room while the
room was created. And that's why, you
know, that is such a hard thing to get
around that even, you know, Graham
Hancock gets to a point where he's now
saying on the Joe Rogan thing, well,
perhaps it's not a sarcophagus. Perhaps
it's a place where you lay down inside
of. So now we're laying a person in it.
It's very akin to a sarcophagus. But
he's saying this may be a place where
your consciousness is being elevated and
and you're you're gaining some kind of,
you know, cosmic wisdom. Okay, that's
that's interesting. But we're still
laying people in it. That's how
compelling just a simple humansized
boxes in that room that had to be laid
there when it's made. Um, but
[clears throat]
these chambers are now above ground.
They're, you know, let's call it roughly
like 45° above ground.
I've tried to get into the psychological
aspect of this and and I have wondered
if if now that we're seeing the pharaoh
being merged with the god Raw, perhaps
he is now a divine being that needs to
be buried above ground. He's not
supposed to be buried below ground.
Or let's go another step further. This
is here's another one of my theories
that no Egyptologist and no alternate
person agrees with.
Is
the inside of the of the pyramids. It's
very odd that there's no hieroglyphs on
the inside of it. I hear a lot of
Egyptologists will will brush this off
as like, well, you know, there's no
hieroglyphs inside of it because uh tomb
decoration just hadn't got to that point
yet. Um but that's but that's not
accurate because we see older tombs that
have tomb decorations in them. It okay
so you have the the chronology of the
pyramids is you have the step pyramid
then you have the pyramid of my doom
then you have the bent pyramid then you
have the red pyramid then you have the
great pyramid. Okay the sakara step
pyramid down in those labyrinths below
that there are depictions of the pharaoh
joer up on the wall in his iconic like
striding forward in a he said festival.
um imagery and he's visiting these
divine sanctuaries and casting these
spells in the afterlife all in
hieroglyphs depicting the pharaoh
himself. Immediately after that there's
no more interior tomb decoration. Why is
that? I I don't know because on the
outside of the temples in the in
theerary temples on the outside there
are depictions of there are hieroglyphs
there there is artwork. Why is it now
disappearing from the inside? Well, the
only crazy explanation I can come up
with in my mind that nobody agrees with
um [clears throat] is I think that there
maybe is some kind of elevation where
the pharaoh himself is no longer the
pious king serving the god, but now he
is the god.
And that the pyramids themselves, this
is actually something that um
the archaeologist, his name starts with
a P, that excavated the the pyramid of
Aminat III. um he asserted that this was
never a tomb and that this was a
symbolic tomb for this for the pharaoh's
c. So you have the call which is the
divine essence. So you have the caw and
the ball. You have these two separate
parts of your soul
that have to coexist in your life and
then they have to meet later on in life.
So that's why the body is preserved so
that the body can last longer with the
caw or with the ba and that the caw the
the divine part of the spirit can find
the body in the next world. when we have
hieroglyphs that depict that this is
what they think that that the Egyptians
believed this is what was happening. Um,
and [clears throat] so I' I've heard
this thrown out there before by one
Egyptologist
back in the in the late 1800s. Um, he
asserted this and I believe it too and I
think that it's true for the fourth
dynasty. Now, Aman Hoteep or Aminat the
third, he's middle kingdom. This is call
it 1900 BC. So I am kind of uh graphing
that on to the fourth dynasty which is 5
to 700 years earlier. Um I think that
these pharaohs were ascending to the
status of a god and that the pyramid was
not for the body of the pharaoh but for
the divine essence of the pharaoh that
belonged to the god. And that's why
there's nothing inside of it because you
don't need to write hieroglyphs inside
of a inside of a pyramid for the divine
essence of a god. You need an
impenetrable an impenetrable building
that the divine soul of the god is
buried in. And that pharaoh himself is
buried somewhere in the south. The
reason I think that is because amenhat
II
pyramid is a model of the old kingdom
pyramids and he was like hearkening back
to this to this lost uh or I should say
he'sarkening back to this older kingdom
and his body was buried in the south
down at a place called Abidos. Abidos is
where the earlier pharaohs were buried.
So he gave himself two burial sites. And
because his pyramid complex is a model
for the old kingdom, I think he knew
something that's invisible to us today
that the pharaohs of the old kingdom are
never buried in their pyramids and their
tombs are down south. Wow.
Because the south is the religious
capital of Egypt. That's where you're
supposed to be buried. But the pyramids
up north, that's the economic capital of
Egypt. And it's the pyramid is like
symbolic. It's symbolic of Egypt's
power. It's symbolic of the divine power
of the god. And it's symbolic of the
divine power of the king. So there was
never a pharaoh buried in those
pyramids.
It's the it's the burial of the divine
essence of the pharaoh's spirit.
That's a crazy explanation,
but we're talking about people who are
basically aliens. I mean, like we don't
know. We we don't relate to these people
in any way. Their life is nothing like
ours. Yeah.
And so it's just you get to this point
of speculation, you know, and my
explanation there
has only slightly more evidence to it
than the pyramid power plant idea. You
know what I mean? We're just so far out.
It's hard to explain.
Yeah. As long as you demarcate the thing
as speculation, I think it's totally
fine and great. And it creates
in science, you need a hypothesis,
right? So you need to get crazy in the
hypothetical stage and then, you know,
got to corroborate it or whatever. But
uh even if you go to the you know
national museum in Cairo and you see
some of these mummified you know
pharaohs they look very short. They
clearly they've engaged in some sort of
cranial deformation to mimic the gods
and they look like gray aliens. They
look so strange
especially during the Amarna period
which is what you were talking about
with
Aenatan.
Man that's a fascinating time period
where Aenatan like flips Egypt on its
head. And what I think was happening
here, [snorts] I'm going to dive into
this at some point, like do a big video
essay on it. You have [clears throat]
the you have the the priests and you
have the temples that are becoming
really really powerful.
And I wonder
this is why I said like um the the
author of the book you were saying that
that this impiiety, this not respecting
of the gods, this losing our religion
begins around 10,000 BC cuz that's about
the fall. that's about the collapse of
the bronze age and and really that's the
fall of Egypt. It's where it takes this
downturn
and um and it's the end of the chapter
of the corruption of the temples I
should say or it's where the corruption
of the temples had permanently
solidified its its negative impact on
Egypt and Egypt would just collapse
forever. Um, [clears throat] at the
beginning of ancient Egypt, the Pharaoh
and his family were the sole rulers of
Egypt. And as long as you had
an unquestionably powerful ruler, Egypt
prospered greatly. But think about the
logistics of this. You become Pharaoh.
Your wife is your wife is like the
divine mother, the king. Um, and then
you give all of your brothers and
sisters, which you probably had a lot,
and you gave all of your cousins and
their, you know, spouses jobs.
Everybody has your best interest at
heart, but your brother dies and you
don't have a great replacement for him,
but you have your friend that you're
really close to. He's not part of your
divine family, but you're going to make
an exception for him. Fast forward 600
years, only 20% of the government is now
part of the Pharaoh's family. And
everybody else is is competing for power
against the Pharaoh through one way or
another. This is what happened with the
temples. And what I think you have is
you see this feud starting with the with
the uh um with the pharaoh Aman Hotep
III who is the father of Akenatan. And
what I can just imagine happening is
Aman Hotep thei third is absolutely fed
up with the temples competing with him
for economic power. You have so many
people bringing money and and incredible
amounts of like meat. You know meat is
extremely expensive in the ancient world
um to bless their ancestors in the
afterlife. So you leave these offerings
at your, you know, at the temple or you
leave the offering as at your ancestors
tombs to feed their to feed them in the
afterlife. And do you think the priests
are just going to let that food rot
there? No. The symbolic gesture is now
over. Now all the priests take the food.
They take the offering and consume it
themselves. That's why you have all
these statues of these fat priests
because they're so wealthy. And clearly
they're they're wealthy in food, they're
wealthy in resources, and they're
wealthy in money. And they own the land
around Egypt. So, they're butting heads
with the pharaoh. And what I just
imagine is the 18th dynasty is the most
powerful part of Egypt. It's it's it's
the it's the juiciest most dramatic
chapter in ancient Egyptian history,
unless you want to count Alexander to
Cleopatra, which is at the very end. Um
and [clears throat] um but anyway, you
have this dramatic increase in power and
it basically reaches its pinnacle under
the reign of Aman Hotep thei who is also
competing with the priesthood. And I I
can just imagine him in the palace like
pacing back and forth with his little
son Aman Hotep IV listening to him and
he's saying, you know, Egypt should be
like the way it was in the old days
where the Pharaoh himself was the king,
was the divine ruler, and he was the
high priest, not some other high priest
that now competes with the Pharaoh. If I
had it, you know, if I could really have
it my way, I would erase all of them. I
would destroy the temples. I would
eliminate all the priests. I would
declare myself the high pharaoh. Egypt
just isn't what it used to be. And the
pharaoh's power is diminished. And you
have this little boy who's growing up
like, "Yeah, you know, [__] those guys."
And and Aman Hotep thei dies. Aman Hotep
the fourth becomes king. And he says,
"I'm not worshiping Amen anymore. This
god that Carneak temple was built to
worship. It's done. Carneak temple. I'm
closing the doors. I'm closing the doors
of all the temples. I'm only going to
acknowledge the one true sun god, the
Aten, and my I'm going to make make my
name Akenatan." And so he changes it and
he moves the capital somewhere else.
It's just a fascinating era.
And then they start depicting themselves
with the elongated skulls
which is really fascinating. It's like
the art just completely changes. And
where does the the skull elongation come
from? We don't really know. We don't
know why it arrived right then. Um and
then the Yarna period ends
within that same generation and the
elongated skull thing goes away.
Whoa.
Yeah. So, it's like this little period
of time where the where the skull
elongation shows up. Why does it show
up?
What period of time was the skull
elongation happening?
I'm going to say that this is like 13th
century BC 1250 BC somewhere. Um, that's
really really rough.
Fascinating.
Maybe even a little bit, maybe even
another century before that. Um, you
know, the numbers get real
messed up. Yeah. Yeah. Um, but yeah,
that's another thing I wonder is like
where did that skull elongation
depiction come from? Because it's so
similar to what you see in other places
around the world.
Oh yeah.
I wonder,
you know, the very speculative part of
me wonders
is the god that Akenatan is interacting
with, is is that where the influence of
that comes from? You know, is it and
when I say God, sometimes I wonder, are
these actual cosmic beings that are
interacting with people
or is it a manifestation
an anthropomorph anthropomorphized
um version of
things that people are seeing while
they're on certain substances,
right? Like
do we have certain substances around the
world that have similar effects on
people because we're all wired the same,
right? Yeah.
So, so you know, you have people that go
down to the Amazon today.
Mhm.
And they take Iawaska and they will meet
a goddess down and and
you have thousands of reports of people
meeting this similar goddess being woman
that automatically knows everything
that's wrong with you and can have such
profound effects on you psychologically
that it can cure your addictions and
things like that. And and I wonder it's
one of two things. It's our brains are
all wired to receive this image of this
goddess woman that has this crazy effect
on us because we're all wired the same.
So, we're all bound to have the same
effect of this plant. Well, in Egypt,
you have your own you have your own
hallucinogens. You know, you have the
lotus flower which is this huge mystery.
Um you have opium
trees. Exactly. DMT. And so you wonder
if these people are taking these
hallucinogens and these gods are like
are like the anthropomorphic
manifestations of what they're
experiencing, right? Yeah. um or whether
or not
well what's fascinating like even the
like the uh the idea of combining this
you know uh DMT with this MAO inhibitor
or whatever which is us putting that in
the kind of modern pharmacological
context but it's combining this you know
substance with this vine in the Amazon
is such a an improbable you know thing
to find in the first place which begs
the question of like you know was that
just trial and error or what sort of
divine inspiration or what inspiration
led them to sort of find this stuff in
the first place and then you have yeah
you have in in Athens as well you have
the lucinian mystery rituals elus being
13 milesi northwest of Athens the sort
of it's the spiritual capital
and you have all the guys who we
consider the fathers of western you know
thought and civilization today Plato
Socrates alabi all these guys you know
taking this keion drink and uh seeing
all sorts of crazy things and
experiencing noises and knowledge of
their p primordial soul but you know
it's sort of under uh under death that
they can't actually talk about the
mystery schools
and uh clearly it had this profound
effect on their on their thought
process.
Yeah. Well, you know uh Heroditus talks
about these mystery cults in Egypt and
he speculates on like I wonder what's
going on here and then while he's in
Egypt he's allowed to participate in
them and then he doesn't talk about it
again. It's fascinating. Yeah. Yeah.
Alsoes is a good example. He talked
about uh the
just the fact that you know the name
Alabiades. I respect you. [laughter]
Thanks, man. Well, he was he got in
trouble for talking about the mysteries
because you you know you're not supposed
to talk about Fight Club or whatever.
So, that's I didn't know that about
Arat. That's that's so interesting.
Um yeah, it's uh I mean the other the
other interesting cut at this is like
you look at all these gaps in
civilization generally. So it's like the
Terrence McKenna stoned ape theory or
whatever. Like you could explain the
doubling in cranial size from
homohabilis to homo sapiens. So 2
million years ago to 300,000 years ago
uh with you know human hunter gatherers
were following scat basically [__]
because they were trying to hunt for
prey or whatever. And you had uh you
know um psilocybus cubensus you know
mushrooms magic mushrooms growing in the
[__] in like you know Africa. Yeah.
And so that it's a it's a reasonable
explanation because you get all these
you know new neural pathways
neurogenesis you know epigenetic changes
and you get this kind of stepwise leap
in cranial size and and functioning.
And then you think about like what's the
next big leap? You know that's a
physiological leap. What about a
cultural leap? It's like the agrarian
revolution and it was wheat, barley and
rye that we were growing. And I think
the kind of conventional narrative is
like you have more time for
specialization for urbanization because
you have you know agriculture takes care
of you don't have to you know hunt and
gather constantly 24/7. Um, but what
grows on wheat, barley, and rye? It's
urgot. And urgot is the substance that
is probably in the in, you know, the
kekon in this drink in the mystery
rituals. And if you talk to people like
Brian Murescu, who wrote the immortality
key about the mystery rituals, he'll say
they go like you're saying way back to
Egypt and, you know, even to, you know,
uh, myia to like, you know, really, uh,
you know, uh, yeah, pre 1000 BC and even
before that. Um and so uh that begs this
question is modern civilization actually
a function of visionary experiences you
know it's maybe it's not just this like
Aam's razor like oh they had more time
so they sort of like built all these
things maybe they were they were
engaging in these sort of mystery
rituals well before
theian mystery I I don't agree with the
they had more time thing it it doesn't
seem
I don't know man that just seems so
outside of human nature. I
agree.
When have you ever felt like, "Oh, I
just had this abundance of time. I'm
going to go erect a megalithic temple."
Totally.
It just doesn't that's just not how
reality works out, you know?
And it's we've been physiologically the
same for 200 300,000 years. Why in the
last few percent, you know, 3 to 5% of
our existence do we create all this
stuff? You need some inspiration for,
you know, I find I find that jarring,
too. Um, you know, we have at least
200,000 years of of homo sapiens being
anatomically the same as we are now. Our
brains are the same size. So, you had
you had a 100,000 years ago, you had
people being born with the same mental
capacity of Einstein.
Yes.
And what were those people doing?
Yeah.
They were definitely doing something.
They were doing something. And uh is it
you know at least my opinion is that one
we haven't found the archaeological
evidence of it yet or what they were
doing just didn't preserve it just it
just disappears you know I mean
buildings will go away and oh gosh what
is it that I read something that was
like if you let New York City sit where
it is that you know more than 90% of New
York City wouldn't be around in like
40,000 years or 50,000 years or
something like that. So [snorts] 150,000
years ago, what are people building that
would possibly be preserved later on?
Yeah.
Um, you know, the likelihood the
likelihood that they're producing toxic
materials that are going to that are
impossible to be destroyed like what
we're doing to the planet right now is
low, I think. Yeah.
Um,
I agree. I I don't I I just say my
hunch,
which I I guess it's not based on
anything, but just my hunch of what I
deem to be realistic is I don't think
that there was another civilization that
existed before us or or or a period in
time where people were ever pursuing
technology that's like what we have
today with, you know, plastics and
electronics and stuff like that.
Whatever they had, I think it probably
falls in line with something being like
simple, natural, non-upgradable. It is
the perfect extrapolation of their
natural resources. Does that make sense?
That's what that's what I would say. If
there's a high civilization
that existed before this chapter, it was
something similar to that that of course
it's not preserved because these are
people who know how to extrapolate to
the to the absolute maximum their the
resources from their natural world.
Yeah. Well, it's it's maybe we see a
renaissance of thought around that sort
of thing. You look at like, you know,
biosphere technology from like New
Mexico or like I don't watch the movie
Avatar and it's like they're they're in
these like, you know, uh, perfectly
ecologically consistent sort of habitats
or whatever. And a lot of what we're
doing now, I mean, we brought up, uh,
SpaceX earlier, it's like with, you
know, um, Starship, like they have like
36 Raptor engines and it's like an
enormous amount of mass ejection. And
then I'm probably marginally, you know,
way more pro- SpaceX than I am the FAA
and, you know, EPA trying to like stop
them or whatever. But it's still brute
force. It's super brutish and like I
think a lot of our our tech is. And
um so yeah, maybe maybe maybe a lot of
that stuff was more advanced. Okay,
going back to ancient Egypt. Um
the curse of King Tut's tomb.
Oh my gosh.
Do you think there's a there there? You
know, I I thought about this
and maybe set it up for the audience.
What is the curse of King Tut's?
Yeah. Yeah. So, uh, you know, I look I
really read about this about four years
ago. Um, but King Tut is the final king
of uh he's a young boy. He's the son of
Aenatan and uh he's the final king of
the 18th dynasty of the Amar of the
Amarna period. And uh this is what we
were talking about earlier where Egypt
just flipped on his head and and they're
they're um uh they're forced everyone's
forced to worship the atin the one
single monotheistic god. It's actually
the first example of monotheism in all
of the ancient world. This predates uh
the exodus in Moses by probably a
century or more.
Um so uh King Tuten Ammun is born King
Tuten.
And uh when when Nefertiti dies who is
the wife of of Akenatan when she passes
away the crown is handed to Tutank
Autton and his advisor a guy named I
who's you know one of the highranking
nobles um in that government basically
advises to tuten
you know the entire country is very
displeased with your father and and the
fact that all of Egypt has been thrown
on its head. We should probably go back
to the way things were. There may be
some truth to that. You know that the
whole revolution of of the Autton may
not have been very good for Egypt's
economy and pretty much all the
documentation we have of that time
supports that. However, all that
documentation comes from the people that
wanted them dead. So there's that.
Um so [clears throat] one way or another
they convince Tutank Autton to return
everything back to the way to the way it
was and he changes his name to Tutank
Ammoon which may or may not have been
his own choice. But he is Pharaoh at
this time and he's only Pharaoh for a
very short period of time. And then
something happens to him. Don't really
know how he died. It looks like from the
way that the blood pulled on the back of
his head. You've you've probably seen
his body in person.
I have. Yeah. [snorts]
So, um, Dr. [clears throat] Bob Brier
did uh did an investigation on him maybe
back in the 90s
and examined his body and the way that
the pool the way that the blood pulls in
the back of his skull looks like he was
hit in the back of the head. His brain,
you know, he had a brain bleed or he was
bleeding inside of his skull and he was
laying he was laying on his back for an
extended period of time and so all that
blood pulled. So they think that he may
have died to a blunt force injury on the
back of his head. That's just a that's
just a a theory. Um, but one way or
another, he's buried with an incredible
amount of treasure
in this rushed tomb, though. It's it's a
shallow rock cut tomb. Uh, but he's
buried with an incredible amount of
treasure. And then I think it's
Aman Hotep I or
maybe it's Aman Hotep thei. His tomb.
No, I don't think it was them cuz they
came. Never mind. Almonds up the first
and third came came before two tank
almond. But somebody's tomb was was cut
into the ground above his and all the
rubble covered up King Tut's tomb. So
his stayed preserved and and overlooked
until I think 1923 when uh when Howard
Carter discovered it. Now, if my memory
serves me correctly, and there's a lot
of legend about this, but as they're
trying to open the tomb, there's
[snorts] some kind of hieroglyph on the
outside that that apparently said
something along the lines of uh of of
of cursing anybody. It's a rough
translation, but it basically curses
anyone who should violate or open
violate or open this tomb. Well, of
course, they're going to open it. and
Howard Carter in the little uh in the U
vault opening, he shines a light through
there and somebody asks him, "Do you see
anything?" And he says, "Yes, wonderful
things." And that's like a very iconic
uh Egypt's logical quote. And uh so they
open it up and of course they find the
richest tomb that's ever been found in
in the history of archaeology. It's the
biggest discovery ever of this very
minor, unimportant young kid
um who was Pharaoh.
Now, uh, if you asked me three years
ago, I could go through the whole
chronology of like how every single
person died. Yeah.
But
almost every person that was in this
excavation had something tragic happen
to them. And several of them died from
poisoning from being exposed to the air
inside the chamber. And so, you have
this paint that's up on the walls and
that paint ruminates in the air and it
makes the air toxic. It's like radiation
or something or
I I don't know. I don't know. It's It's
something to do with with the paint
ruminating the air for thousands of
years. It makes it, you know, you can
imagine like the carcinogens in that
air. It's just straight up poison, you
know. Um must be like smoking a thousand
cigarettes in a second, you know, just
crazy.
Um and uh so some of them died from
poisoning from being exposed to the air.
And then some people like their homes
would burn down with them in it when
they were back in the Americas or they'd
get some kind of crazy disease and die
or their spouse would die.
There was like I think there was like a
scorpion bite.
That's right. There's something like
that too. And then um
I forget how Carter died, but he died in
some strange way, but he was the last
person anyway. Everybody before him died
leading up to him. I've thought about
this before. You know, is is it all
coincidence or was there really a
mummy's curse?
[sighs and gasps]
And sometimes I wonder if it's not both.
If it's
if it's um
you know how I I've talked to some of my
friends about this about this before,
how some people seem to just have a will
that is so strong that the world moves
out of their way.
Yes.
You know, I mean, look at look at so
many successful people.
Their will like Trump or Elon Musk.
That's what I was thinking.
It's like they shift timelines according
to their will or something. And Steve
Jobs thought about this. He called it
magical thinking that that you could
ignore things and they would go away.
That you could believe things so
strongly that the earth would morph
itself around your will. You and I've
always wondered if with something like
that if it's yes, the paint inside of
the inside of the chamber did poison
these people and kill them,
but that was that was what Two Tank
Almond would have wanted. You know what
I mean? Uh but then you have this like
cosmic element that goes beyond that.
Like
did these people violating two tank
almond's tomb
really result in this lady's house
burning down with her and her family in
it?
It's certainly ominous and it's
certainly fascinating to us, you know,
observing it from the outside. Uh I
don't know. Yeah, I I don't know. You
know, I I think that there's definitely
elements of
science and our natural world and and
the way that our brains connect to the
world around us that isn't measurable.
Yes.
At least to us yet, you know. Um,
for sure.
Yeah,
I definitely agree with that. And I
think belief is incredibly like a good
example of our modern paradigm writing
that off is like in medicine you have
like the placebo effect which often is
way more effective than you know the
pharmacological you know uh uh thing
that you're taking or whatever and then
you just write that off you go oh it's
placebo and then it's like well wait
belief is extremely powerful and like
you take a sugar pill and believe a
thing and it's more effective in certain
cases than biochemistry like that's
that's like a big deal but
it's sort of we live in this age where
like you're not supposed to trust your
eyes and your mind is irrational and you
know I think I think we're uh we're
probably on the verge of sort of a quote
unquote re-enchantment of reality. I
think that's that's ending uh for better
and for worse. Like you have,
you know, Gen Z astral projecting on Tik
Tok and it's it's like weird, right?
Like you have this what we're talking
about the opening of the floodgates of
the relativization of like all
information that the the death of
expertise is it's like there's some bad
that comes with that. But
so yeah, well it this is this is a sad
thing is that [clears throat]
you know the um the institutions that
used to feed us information became
politicized and and
corrupted and weaponized against normal
people. Yes.
Um you know
I don't want to get overtly political
but it is [laughter] Yeah. Well, I mean,
it's it's so obvious as to how we've
been, you know, normal people have been
manipulated and lied to by
by the media, by our government, by
everything. Um, and
I think the pandemic woke a lot of
people up.
Yeah, it definitely did. I mean, it is
absolutely ridiculous the things that we
were being told in, you know, from 2020
even up till now. You know, it just the
things that we're made to believe is
absolutely insane. Um
a and uh you know people like we just
don't uh we have no reason to trust uh
the authority anymore. And a really sad
side effect of that is that uh
anti-intellectualism
y
is on the rise now because I mean there
really is there really are amazingly
intelligent people who are devoted to
their area of expertise in their field
of science whether it's you know biology
archaeology whatever uh medicine um that
are really really devoted to that and
that you need these people who are
wildly intelligent that study these
really strange fields to to be able to
tell you information, but now like we
just don't trust any of that at all. Um,
and that's and that's sad. Um, but it's
the fault of uh it's the fault of those
institutions for allowing themselves to
be uh weaponized for modern politics. My
opinion is I think it's really all about
modern politics. It's all about modern
politics and money. Personally, I do not
think that there was that there have
been archaeological
discoveries that change all of known
humanity that are so impactful that like
a secret cabal came in and covered it
all up and hid it from humanity.
PE those people don't give it. They do
not care about that. What they care
about is geopolitics and making money
and manipulating the modern world. Yeah,
it's all all the corruption is based on
the modern world. I don't think they're
trying to cover up the past cuz what
would it do? Like like if if all of a
sudden we knew that Atlantis really
existed 12,000 years ago and now it's
ruins under the ground.
Yeah, it happen totally.
It's incredibly fascinating.
Y
but why would somebody cover that
cover that up? No, I I I generally
agree. I also think some of these
discoveries might not happen because of
yeah like you said politics or like
basic bureaucracy slowness we talked
about you know haz earlier you know
ministry of culture it's like you want
certain things claimed by the local
governments or like you want them sort
of you know to be involved in the
national history of that government so
you don't want anything to predate you
know you want to you want to go against
the Robert Shock John Anthony West
narrative
another thing is is Egypt
doesn't have a lot of interest. Let's
just highlight on Egypt. They don't have
a lot of interest in another Howard
Carter, another white guy making a huge
discovery.
They wanted to be an Egyptian and really
Zahiwas wants it to be himself. Y um and
I've spoken to lots of Egyptologists and
you know uh this even happened in Peru.
You know those big tunnels that were
discovered in uh under the ground in
Peru recently? Have you heard about
this?
No, actually. Uh in Cusco up at Sak
Woman.
Interesting. This just popped up on the
news maybe a month ago or so. This is a
big big ordeal that these these tunnels
were finally discovered and they're
going to start exploring them. I was in
those tunnels in September.
That's how long ago that they that they
had been that they had known about them.
And it only just now became a press
release. Why? Because
the government has got to get everything
together to make the most money
possible, to make the biggest splash
possible. It's all a marketing campaign,
you know, to to drive tourism, to drive
interest, to drive funding, to drive
money. Everything is so premeditated.
It's not like, "Hey, we just found this.
Let's post this on X for everyone to
see."
It's the same thing in Egypt, man. It
they discover um they just discovered
the tomb of
was it Tutmo the
Tutmos II, I believe, is a tomb that
they just discovered in in Egypt. And
it's kind of unremarkable on the inside.
that it's crumbled away a lot. It looks
like it was never even completed. Um, I
heard about that tomb in October and
that and the publication just came out,
I don't know, within the last couple
months or so. When I was there in
October, I heard about that tomb uh
having been discovered earlier in 2024.
So, over a year later, they released the
publication. So, this is all on a this
is all on a timeline because they're
constantly discovering things in Egypt,
but they don't want to if they dropped
10 new discoveries,
nine of them would get overshadowed and
not get the kind of press that they
want, which may cause a burst in tourism
and then it slows back down. So, it's
all in this timeline. Archaeology is it
is uh tourism keeps archaeology alive,
right?
Yeah. It's almost like planned
obsolescence or something like people
have conspiracies about, you know, like
Apple products or something. It's really
fascin,
you know, these structures below the
pyramids. If that was 2022, why is it
coming out now? You know, that that's an
interesting question. Or
I remember, you know, uh doing this
piece with David Grush, this UFO
whistleblower who testified before
Congress, uh you know, in uh end of
summer of 2023. And it was this big
deal. It's like all these people started
to cross the Rubicon of maybe this UFO
stuff is actually real.
And then the day after we put our like
documentary out, which I thought was,
you know, it's pretty pretty
comprehensive and and good. Uh uh if I
do say so myself, uh uh the next day
there's this like Mexico City Congress
thing about uh these Peruvian, you know,
uh alien mummies or whatever. And I'm
out I'm now actually looking into that
case and I think there's some
interesting stuff there. But like the
way it was presented was such a jokey
weird, you know, way. And it was, you
know, a lot of what was ended up being
popularized were these knockoff, you
know, kind of it was like chicken bones
and and rooster head or what it was like
clearly fake stuff was presented in this
weird way. Okay. And I I wonder some of
this might be this emergent, you know,
the wheel gets, you know, created in
South America at the same time as
Africa. And then some of it might be
this sort of political meto syndrome
where it's like, oh, you discovered that
well, I've been sitting on this. Me,
too. You know, and then you you have to
put out your thing. And it's uh it's
it's it's more political than it is
truth seeeking. And that's not to say
that again there's there's nothing there
on the uh the mummy thing. I think there
probably actually is some interesting
stuff going on there, but that's for a
later date. Um, I have an excursion to
pitch you on.
Okay.
Okay. So, I six or seven years ago met a
guy named Luis Felipe San Salvador.
Okay.
And he's a super eccentric guy. He has
uh he's directed a couple of movies
under the name Jamaica No Problem. He's
like larger than life guy. Anyways, I
have became friends with him and I
realized that uh he was not lying about
the fact that he came from a long line
of concistadors from the 16th century.
He's Ecuadorian
and he lives on this massive compound in
Ecuador and he even came out with a
movie called The Son of Man uh because
he has maps in his family that go back
to that time around Otawa's ransom, El
Dorado. and he goes searching literally
with like a team of like 10 people or
whatever into the Amazon every single
year to find El Dorado. And he also so
he has maps to El Dorado and then he
also has maps to something called the
Teaos Cave or the Teaos Library.
Okay. Uh Neil Armstrong in 1969 went to
the moon of course and came back and his
second expedition was in the Amazon to
find this Teaos cave, this Teaos library
and a BBC film crew followed him around
trying to find this thing and he
couldn't find it. And my friend Luis
Felipe San Salvador says that his father
sent Neil Armstrong in the wrong
direction and that he has the real
location of this thing. And it's this,
if you talk to people in the local area,
it's this well-known myth that uh there
are these caves that exist with this
kind of ancient alien looking metallic
artifacts like like metallic artifacts
that seem so inacronistic and like you
know beyond human capabilities even now.
Uh and so
I think we should go and try to find
these things.
I would be down. [laughter] So this is
in Ecuador.
Yes. Let's get we we have let's get on a
Zoom with Louise and
I would be down.
I'm so down. Let's do it, man.
I I would love that, man. I um I have
lots of experience in the jungle at this
point.
Okay.
Um quite a lot.
Did Have you seen where they just found
like 11,000 structures in the Ecuadorian
jungle recently?
No. 11,000.
Yeah. Yeah. They they found a city I
think with 11,000
structures and it uh the city layout is
on like the top of these mountain ridges
and and all the city layouts are these
four long structures with this huge you
know maybe 200t x 200t wide square plaza
in the center of them and it's thousands
of these plazas that are made and it's
the exact same layout as uh what we see
in Central America and in Mexico with
the Maya world meo America and Man,
there's no there's no doubt that
that civilization I mean, think about
this, man. [clears throat]
Think about how many different just off
the top of your head and and you know,
neither one of us are an expert in this,
but I can name a lot of different North
American in the borders of the United
States uh Native American cultures,
whether it's like the Creek Indians, the
Apaches, the Comanches, the Cherokee,
the Sue. I can go on and on and on and
on and on. Okay, the Amazon is the same
size as the United States.
So crazy.
Imagine how many different civilizations
existed beneath the canopy of the
Amazon,
you know, and how expansive and in depth
that history is. I mean, North American
native history is so complicated. You
even have this uh you even there's a
there's a federation of tribes that were
united um under um
oh my goodness who's the who's the
Native American Squanto.
Uh Squanto unites creates this
federation of these three tribes that
were all rivals against each other
during his childhood. But he gets
captured and enslaved in London and then
comes back and then he unites these
tribes. I mean, that's just one little
place where you have a confederation of
three different tribes that come
together and form their own government
in one little area of Massachusetts.
Imagine the rest of the continent. And
then project that onto the Amazon of how
expansive and complicated and nuanced
that is. I mean, that
the Amazon [snorts]
is incredibly dangerous. um whether
you're dealing with humans or the
natural world
[sighs and gasps] and and almost
impenetrable.
But beneath that canopy really is the
widest, deepest frontier of studying
human history. Um and it's kind of like
the last frontier. I think another
frontier is the Sahara, which is equally
as large
and equally as dangerous and impasable
to uh to explore. Not that it's not
feasible, but it is very difficult. I
mean, I did I did a uh
I [clears throat] did a six-h hour
excursion in West Texas a few days ago,
and every time I do that in the desert,
I'm reminded of the fact that you
wouldn't make it very long. Yeah.
If you had to do a serious expedition in
the desert, and you weren't really,
really well prepared. Yeah. You know, um
just in those six hours, I was like I
was like, you know, if I go another two
hours,
I will probably die if I didn't get
water, you know. Um, and in the in the
jungle it's exactly the same, except
it's worse because you sweat more. The
the the sun might not be right on you,
but man, you'll you will sweat an insane
amount. All of your hydration is gone.
Uh, you know, you you you'll be
dehydrated in one afternoon.
Going through Guatemala is brutal. Yeah.
And you have all these different plants
that have effects on you that even
modern medicine hasn't journeyied out
there to study. That's what I worry
about with the Amazon where it's like
this like little thing bites you where
you like, you know, you like come into
contact with some plant that you know
messes with your, you know, it's like
poison ivy on steroids. [laughter]
In uh I'll tell you in October
Mhm.
I did back to back to back. I did Peru
for 11 days, I did Egypt for 20 days,
and I did um I did Guatemala for nine
days.
Unbelievable. And I was only home for
one day during that whole period. And in
Peru
when we went out to Machu Picchu, we
were there for two full days. And the
mosquitoes that bit me out there
Mhm.
were so strong that they left scars on
my arms. Like if you look close, you'll
see all these little dots all over my
arms from where I got bit.
And what they infect you with is so
potent that when you scratch it, it will
it will stay in your fingernails and
it'll spread around your body. and and 2
weeks later I when I was in Egypt, I was
still having dots pop up on my arms from
these uh mosquitoes that bit me in the
Amazon. And then in Egypt, I'm mostly
fine. Egypt is real easy to to get
around. Um then I go to the jungles in
Guatemala, which is essentially the
Amazon. Um you know, not the same
geographically, but like the environment
is very similar. And something happened
to me while while I was in the jungle,
and I got really sick. not food
poisoning sick, not a cold sick.
And even the local guys could tell that
uh the local watermelons, they were like
they were like they were like, "Oh, you
have what do they say? Jungle fever. You
have jungle sickness." Cuz they could
tell how tired and like drained I was.
And they thought it was the mosquitoes
biting me that it was giving me
something. And I was 75% deaf in each
ear by the end of the trip. I couldn't
hear anything.
Oh jeez. Were you freaking out?
No. I knew it would go away. I just
figured it would. But I didn't know what
I didn't know what was like oppressing
me. I was just so rund down and tired.
But I didn't have any symptoms other
than I was almost deaf, you know? We
could be talking like this and I would
barely hear you.
Whoa.
It was so bizarre, man.
On that note, [laughter]
let's go to the Amazon.
On that note, let's um you know, but
that was actually the only time that
anything like that has ever happened to
me. I I I've been back to the jungle
since then twice and uh and I was fine.
Okay.
So, I don't know. Something something
happened to me. I don't know what it
was.
You were initiated. Now you're
only in Guatemala. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
I've I've gotten very sick in Guatemala
as well. So Oh, really?
Yeah. Maybe it's a thing you just have
to go through. It's like Have you gone
to Tall?
I have. It's amazing.
That's That's where I was at. That's
that's where I got sick was in Tall.
Okay.
So, I don't know what I don't know what
it was that happened. And then I went
out to Elm Miridor. Have you heard of
this?
I've never heard of Elmir.
[clears throat]
It's a It's a 2-hour helicopter ride
into the jungle north.
And uh so you drop down and it's this
giant pyramid that is supposedly similar
to the size of the Great Pyramid in in
Egypt. Um
but you can't really tell because it's
just this big hump in the middle of this
flat jungle. And the pyramid was so
large, man, that when I was coming back
down from it, I walked down the pyramid
Mhm. And then uh I walked along this
trail for about five minutes
and then arrived on a staircase that
went down and I was like
for the last 5 minutes I was walking on
the pyramid straight.
Wow.
That's how big it was. So I came down
from a certain portion and I reached
this flat platform and I walked for five
minutes before reaching the next slope
of the pyramid.
That's how large it is. [cough] And
[clears throat] to your point that you
were saying earlier is the farther they
go back in time with so many cultures,
the bigger the structures get.
Yeah.
That is the first known pyramid in it's
called Ladanta. Ladanta and Ligra.
They're these two giant pyramids that
face each other. They're about equal in
size. Those are the oldest pyramids
known in the Maya world.
Wow.
Made out of the largest stones ever used
in the Maya world. Unbelievable. it it
but instead of u these huge rectangular
stones that you see in Egypt they're
like these Lincoln logs
but the Lincoln logs aren't stacked on
top of one each of one another in the
way that we would think that they would
be used
imagine a Lincoln log laid this way
and they're stacked on top of each other
like this so in the least
in the least uh easy way possible the
least efficient way possible is the way
that it was done [laughter] and it was
built
It is so massive, like the actual mass,
the structural mass inside of them is so
impressive that the jungle, unlike most
Maya pyramids where you have blocks that
are about this big in most Maya pyramids
and the roots of the trees wrap around
those little blocks and dig into the
pyramid and then a tree will grow out of
the pyramid and rip all the blocks apart
from each other. So you see like the
jungle growing out of these huge
pyramids. this pyramid. No, the jungle
is growing on it, but what they'll but
all the the roots grow flat against the
stone because the stones are
impenetrable. So, you can grab a piece
of the jungle and peel it off the side
of the and peel it off the side of the
pyramid and the pyramid's still there.
The roots never penetrated between the
stones.
That was at the beginning of time in the
Maya world and it was never surpassed
since then.
Kind of the same way in ancient Egypt.
Wow.
Yeah.
Fascinating, man. Well, I'm going to
follow up with you if you're serious.
We'll do it. We'll seriously do it.
Yeah, that's um I I would love to uh
return to South America.
Yeah.
Yeah. I've never been to Ecuador. I've
only ever been to Peru.
Cool.
Um Have you ever been to Peru?
I'm going uh I think in the next month,
but I've never been.
Are you really? Where are you going to
Peru?
I am going to Lima for sure. And then I
want to go to Machu Picchu because I'm
going to be there and uh otherwise I'm
kind of open if you have any
suggestions.
Yeah. Well, the sacred valley, man. I
mean, that's that's uh that's Cusco. So,
what you would probably do is you would
land in Lima.
Uh I'm sure you'll go see um
I'm sure you'll go see the the
archaeological site of Lima. Um but then
you'll probably go to the u there's a
there's a famous museum there with all
the pottery. Um I forget what it's I
forget what it's called. Um
and uh you'll go there, but then you'll
probably fly from Lima into Cusco, I'm
guessing. And Cusco is like one of the
maybe the best city I've ever been to in
in my travels. The nicest, cleanest,
most beautiful city I've ever been to.
You can walk down any any um alleyway,
any part of the city, and it's perfectly
safe. Really?
Yeah, man. You you you would love it. I
mean, it's no surprise that there's so
many Americans that live in that in that
city. Mhm.
Can you hit the tunnels there, or is
that like blocked off?
[clears throat]
No, I got access to it uh through the
head archaeologist there. Yeah,
you got the hookups.
Yeah. And uh so so they they uh
somebody on their team watches my
channel. Okay.
And has seen has seen some podcasts I've
been on and so
I was able to get in and and check out
the check out the tunnels. But you would
go there, see Sakiwoman,
go see um go see the um the Corancha
which is in the center of the city of
Cusco which is like
the most the most impressive stonework
in all of the ancient world. The most
precise I mean just razor sharp like the
sides of of the
Egyptian architecture of actual
buildings that people walked inside of
has nothing on the corona
nothing on it. It's made from gray
andesite and the blocks like lean in on
each other. So they're the walls are
like trapezoidal and so you can just
imagine the sophistication of taking
gray andesite which is you know as hard
as granite
and just it has these razor sharp edges
on the architecture just absolutely
stunning. And then from there you would
take a bus to Oonte Tombbo or a taxi or
something like that. Um to Oontante
Tombbo whereas another megalithic site
and then from there you take the train
to Machu Picchu.
Epic. I think I just got my whole
itinerary laid out.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Luke, I appreciate your time, man. This
was a blast and uh I'm so grateful that
we were able to speak before you uh hit
Singapore and then you moved out of out
of Texas. So uh
appreciate you, man.
Yeah, man. Thanks so much for having me.
This flew by.